---
layout: post
title:  "A love letter to E_2-rings"
date:   2019-06-06
categories: algebraic-topology
---

<script type="text/javascript" async=""
src="https://www.google-analytics.com/analytics.js"></script>
<script async=""
src="https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtag/js?id=UA-109004213-1"></script>
<script>
  window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || [];
    function gtag(){dataLayer.push(arguments);}
      gtag('js', new Date());

        gtag('config', 'UA-109004213-1');
</script>
<script type="text/javascript"
src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML">
</script>

$$\newcommand{\KO}{\mathrm{KO}} \newcommand{\TMF}{\mathrm{TMF}}
\newcommand{\KU}{\mathrm{KU}} \newcommand{\Mfg}{M_\mathrm{fg}}
\newcommand{\spec}{\mathrm{Spec}\ } \newcommand{\dX}{\mathcal{X}}
\newcommand{\co}{\mathcal{O}} \newcommand{\Z}{\mathbf{Z}}
\newcommand{\top}{\mathrm{top}} \newcommand{\E}{\mathbf{E}}
\newcommand{\GG}{\mathbf{G}} \newcommand{\DD}{\mathbf{D}}
\newcommand{\Mell}{M_\mathrm{ell}} \newcommand{\ce}{\mathcal{E}}
\newcommand{\H}{\mathrm{H}} \newcommand{\dR}{\mathrm{dR}}
\newcommand{\cf}{\mathcal{F}} \newcommand{\FF}{\mathbf{F}}
\newcommand{\spf}{\mathrm{Spf}\ } \newcommand{\cA}{\mathcal{A}}
\newcommand{\Mcub}{M_\mathrm{cub}} \newcommand{\Mqd}{M_\mathrm{qd}}
\newcommand{\Aut}{\mathrm{Aut}} \newcommand{\tmf}{\mathrm{tmf}}
\newcommand{\Tmf}{\mathrm{Tmf}} \newcommand{\Map}{\mathrm{Map}}
\newcommand{\Ext}{\mathrm{Ext}} \newcommand{\End}{\mathrm{End}}
\newcommand{\cg}{\mathcal{G}} \newcommand{\Hom}{\mathrm{Hom}}
\newcommand{BP}[1]{\mathrm{BP}\langle #1\rangle} \newcommand{\QQ}{\mathbf{Q}}
\newcommand{\PP}{\mathbf{P}} \newcommand{\Gal}{\mathrm{Gal}}
\newcommand{\proj}{\mathrm{Proj}\ } \newcommand{\Ltwo}{L_{K(2)}}
\newcommand{\Eoo}{\mathbf{E}_\infty} \newcommand{\ol}[1]{\overline #1}
\newcommand{\pic}{\mathrm{Pic}} \newcommand{\RP}{\mathbf{R}P}
\newcommand{\BO}{\mathrm{BO}} \newcommand{\cc}{\mathbf{C}}
\newcommand{\CP}{\mathbf{C}P} \newcommand{\wt}[1]{\widetilde #1}
\newcommand{\RR}{\mathbf{R}} \renewcommand{\S}{\mathbb{S}}
\newcommand{\Lone}{L_{K(1)}} \newcommand{\Ltwo}{L_{K(2)}}
\newcommand{\gl}{\mathrm{gl}} \newcommand{\Lk}{L_{K(n)}}
\newcommand{\ku}{\mathrm{ku}} \newcommand{\ko}{\mathrm{ko}}
\newcommand{\GL}{\mathrm{GL}} \newcommand{\Ln}{L_n}
\newcommand{\Lt}{L_{K(t)}} \newcommand{\W}{\mathrm{W}}
\newcommand{\BU}{\mathrm{BU}} \newcommand{\SU}{\mathrm{SU}}
\newcommand{\MU}{\mathrm{MU}} \newcommand{\ul}[1]{\underline #1}
\newcommand{\Sq}{\mathrm{Sq}} \newcommand{\Tr}{\mathrm{Tr}}
\newcommand{\d}{\mathrm{d}} \newcommand{\HP}{\mathbf{H}P}
\newcommand{\cL}{\mathcal{L}} \newcommand{\cs}{\mathrm{cs}}
\newcommand{\cd}{\mathcal{D}} \newcommand{\Bord}{\mathrm{Bord}}
\newcommand{\SO}{\mathrm{SO}} \newcommand{\cC}{\mathcal{C}}
\newcommand{\Sp}{\mathrm{Sp}} \newcommand{\Lkd}{L_{K(d)}}
\newcommand{\Mod}{\mathrm{Mod}} \newcommand{\cH}{\mathcal{H}}
\newcommand{\ket}[1]{|#1 \rangle} \newcommand{\Bun}{\mathrm{Bun}}
\newcommand{\cM}{\mathcal{M}} \newcommand{\MTH}{\mathrm{MT}H}
\newcommand{\MSO}{\mathrm{MSO}}$$

Dear $$\E_2$$-rings/algebras/operads,

As you know, a lot of modern work in the area of structured ring spectra is
dedicated to proving that certain spectra are $$\E_\infty$$-rings. There seem to
be at least two reasons for why we care if a spectrum admits the structure of an
$$\E_\infty$$-ring: one, it is more structure on an object, and having more
structure can never be a bad thing; second, you get *algebraic* structure on the
homotopy or homology of $$\E_\infty$$-rings which allows one to prove strong
nonexistence results.  Spectral algebraic geometry also uses $$\E_\infty$$-rings
as the replacement for commutative rings. 

It's this last statement that I'd like to talk to you about in this post. There are a few
levels of commutativity in spectra: homotopy commutative rings,
$$\E_2$$-rings (!), $$\E_3$$-rings, etc. Using homotopy commutative rings as the
basis for spectral algebraic geometry is not a very good idea; you can't take
limits of homotopy commutative rings and remain in the world of homotopy
commutative rings (in particular, you can't take global sections of sheaves on
schemes defined in this manner). Working with $$\E_n$$-rings for $$n\geq 2$$ is
a good bet, though. This is the topic of [John Francis'
thesis](https://sites.math.northwestern.edu/~jnkf/writ/thezrev.pdf).

The lowest level of coherent commutativity one can reasonably impose on a ring
spectrum is --- surprise! --- that of admitting the structure of an
$$\E_2$$-ring. That's where you come in. I'd like to believe that it is
interesting to study a version of spectral algebraic geometry with you,
$$\E_2$$-rings, as the replacement for commutative ring spectra, and regard
having an $$\E_k$$-structure for $$k>2$$ as being extra structure on the
$$\E_2$$-ring. I'll abusively refer to this other kind of algebraic geometry as
spectral algebraic geometry, with no $$\E_2$$-adornation. This seems like a good
idea for a few reasons.

Here's one. We said above that one of the reasons for liking spectra $$E$$ with
an $$\co$$-algebra structure, where $$\co$$ is a topological operad, is that it
gives extra algebraic structure on the homotopy or homology of the spectrum.
This algebraic structure comes in the form of power operations $$\psi^k:\pi_0
E\to E^0(\co(k))$$, where $$\co(k)$$ are the spaces in $$\co$$. One of the key
power operations playing a role in modern chromatic homotopy theory is the lift
of Frobenius $$\psi^p$$ coming setting $$\co = \E_\infty$$ and $$k=p$$, so that
$$\co(k) = B\Sigma_p$$. This is determined by an element of $$E^0(B\Sigma_p)$$
(or, more specifically, an element of $$E^0(B\Sigma_p)/\mathrm{tr}$$). But it
turns out that one doesn't need to go all the way up to the $$p$$th space of the
$$\E_\infty$$-operad: one already has $$\psi^p$$ in the cohomology of your
$$p$$th space. In particular, one can prove [nilpotence
theorems](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1403.2023.pdf) and [nonexistence
results](http://www.mit.edu/~sanathd/roots-of-unity.pdf).

Another motivation comes from the topic we've been discussing in a
[bunch](/algebraic-topology/2019/04/01/mrs.html) of [previous
posts](/algebraic-topology/2019/04/18/cmn.html). Recall that a theorem of
Hopkins and Mahowald shows that the Thom spectrum of the map $$\Omega^2 S^3\to
B\GL_1(\S_p)$$ detecting $$1-p$$ is $$\H\FF_p$$; in other words, the free
$$\E_2$$-ring with $$p=0$$ is $$\H\FF_p$$. According to the colloquial statement
of the program sketched in the linked posts, the free $$\E_2$$-$$T(n)$$-algebra
with $$v_n=0$$ is $$\BP{n-1}$$. This is a strong structural result, and the
precise form of the result is rather striking; we don't just get a complex
oriented ring of height $$n-1$$ --- we get the *initial* complex oriented ring
of height $$n-1$$. In particular, the algebraic structure obtained from being an
algebra over you, $$\E_2$$, is somehow enough to force strong rigidity in the
spectral algebraic world.

The nail in the coffin, however, comes from the observation that if one
considers algebraic geometry with $$\E_\infty$$-rings, multiple interesting
examples of spectral schemes are simply thrown out. For instance, Ravenel's
$$X(n)$$ spectra are known to be $$\E_2$$-rings but not $$\E_3$$-rings. The
classical [stack associated to $$X(n)$$](http://www.mit.edu/~sanathd/wood.pdf)
is the moduli stack of formal groups with a chosen coordinate up to degree
$$n-1$$. Also featuring in the proof of nilpotence theorem is the $$\E_2$$-ring
$$\Sigma^\infty_+ \Omega^2 S^{2np^k+1}$$, and its action on the Thom spectrum of
the subcomplex $$J_{p^k-1}(S^{2n})\times_{\Omega S^{2n+1}} \Omega \SU(n+1)$$ of
$$\Omega \SU(n+1)$$. A long-term goal is to cast the proof of the nilpotence
theorem in an algebro-geometric light, so having a spectral scheme corresponding
to the $$\E_2$$-ring under consideration seems like a good idea.

Lots of love, and thanks for the $$Q_1$$,

\--
Sanath.

P.S. This discussion suggests a question: what are some results in either the
purely algebro-geometric or purely chromatic aspects of spectral algebraic
geometry which rely upon using the entire $$\E_\infty$$-ring structure?

Certainly the theory of power operations gives an example: Strickland has showed
that the Morava $$E$$-theory of $$B\Sigma_{p^k}$$ is related to subgroups of the
associated universal deformation formal group. Using Lurie's work on elliptic
cohomology ("tempered cohomology"), one can show that if $$A$$ is the global
sections of an even periodic ($$\E_\infty$$-)refinement $$\dX$$ of a nice
Deligne-Mumford stack, then the $$A$$-cohomology of $$BC_p$$ is related to
$$p$$-torsion points in the $$p$$-divisible group associated to $$\dX$$. I don't
know anything about $$\E_2$$-power operations on Morava $$E$$-theory, though. It
might be the case that interesting algebraic information is already visible in
this case.
