---
layout: post
title:  "The moduli of p-divisible groups"
date:   2019-02-21
categories: algebraic-geometry
---

<script type="text/javascript" async=""
src="https://www.google-analytics.com/analytics.js"></script>
<script async=""
src="https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtag/js?id=UA-109004213-1"></script>
<script>
  window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || [];
    function gtag(){dataLayer.push(arguments);}
      gtag('js', new Date());

        gtag('config', 'UA-109004213-1');
</script>
<script type="text/javascript"
src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML">
</script>

$$\newcommand{\KO}{\mathrm{KO}} \newcommand{\TMF}{\mathrm{TMF}}
\newcommand{\KU}{\mathrm{KU}} \newcommand{\Mfg}{M_\mathrm{fg}}
\newcommand{\spec}{\mathrm{Spec}\ } \newcommand{\dX}{\mathcal{X}}
\newcommand{\co}{\mathcal{O}} \newcommand{\Z}{\mathbf{Z}}
\newcommand{\top}{\mathrm{top}} \newcommand{\E}{\mathbf{E}}
\newcommand{\GG}{\mathbf{G}} \newcommand{\DD}{\mathbf{D}}
\newcommand{\Mell}{M_\mathrm{ell}} \newcommand{\ce}{\mathcal{E}}
\newcommand{\H}{\mathrm{H}} \newcommand{\dR}{\mathrm{dR}}
\newcommand{\cf}{\mathcal{F}} \newcommand{\FF}{\mathbf{F}}
\newcommand{\spf}{\mathrm{Spf}\ } \newcommand{\cA}{\mathcal{A}}
\newcommand{\Mcub}{M_\mathrm{cub}} \newcommand{\Mqd}{M_\mathrm{qd}}
\newcommand{\Aut}{\mathrm{Aut}} \newcommand{\tmf}{\mathrm{tmf}}
\newcommand{\Tmf}{\mathrm{Tmf}} \newcommand{\Map}{\mathrm{Map}}
\newcommand{\Ext}{\mathrm{Ext}} \newcommand{\End}{\mathrm{End}}
\newcommand{\cg}{\mathcal{G}} \newcommand{\Hom}{\mathrm{Hom}}
\newcommand{BP}[1]{\mathrm{BP}\langle #1\rangle} \newcommand{\QQ}{\mathbf{Q}}
\newcommand{\PP}{\mathbf{P}} \newcommand{\Gal}{\mathrm{Gal}}
\newcommand{\proj}{\mathrm{Proj}\ } \newcommand{\Ltwo}{L_{K(2)}}
\newcommand{\Eoo}{\mathbf{E}_\infty} \newcommand{\ol}[1]{\overline #1}
\newcommand{\pic}{\mathrm{Pic}} \newcommand{\d}{\mathrm{d}}
\newcommand{\F}{\mathrm{F}} \newcommand{\wt}[1]{\widetilde #1}
\newcommand{\AA}{\mathbf{A}} \newcommand{\PP}{\mathbf{P}}
\newcommand{\top}{\mathrm{top}} \newcommand{\der}{\mathrm{der}}
\newcommand{\M}{M} \newcommand{\colim}{\mathrm{colim}\ }
\newcommand{\GL}{\mathrm{GL}} \newcommand{\W}{\mathrm{W}}
\newcommand{\et}{\mathrm{et}} \newcommand{\im}{\mathrm{im}}$$

I want to write down some facts about the moduli stack of ($$1$$-dimensional)
$$p$$-divisible groups. Recall that a $$p$$-divisible group $$G$$ of height
$$n$$ over a $$p$$-adic ring $$R$$ is an fppf sheaf of abelian groups such that

* $$[p^k]:G\to G$$ is surjective for all $$k$$;
* The kernel $$G[p^k]$$ of $$[p^k]:G\to G$$ is a finite flat group scheme over
  $$R$$ of rank $$p^{nk}$$; and
* $$\colim G[p^k] \cong G$$.

We say that $$G$$ is a $$1$$-dimensional $$p$$-divisible group if the
completion of $$G$$ at the identity is a formal group of dimension $$1$$. Let
$$\M_p(n)$$ denote the moduli of $$1$$-dimensional $$p$$-divisible groups of
height $$n$$. The goal of this post is to prove that $$\M_p(n)$$ is an fpqc
stack over $$\spec \Z_p$$; moreover, it is a *pro-Artin stack*: there are Artin
stacks $$\dX_i$$ for $$i\geq 1$$ along with morphisms $$\dX_i \to \dX_{i-1}$$
and $$\M_p(n) \to \dX_i$$ such that the map $$\M_p(n) \to \varprojlim \dX_i$$
is an isomorphism.

For $$k\geq 2$$, let $$\dX_k$$ denote the moduli of $$1$$-dimensional
$$k$$-truncated Barsotti-Tate groups, i.e., finite flat $$p^k$$-torsion schemes
$$G$$ of rank $$p^{nk}$$ such that $$G$$ is a flat $$\Z/p^k$$-module. Let
$$\dX_1$$ denote the moduli of $$1$$-dimensional $$1$$-truncated Barsotti-Tate
groups, i.e., $$p$$-torsion finite flat group schemes $$G$$ of rank $$p^n$$
such that if $$S_0\subseteq S$$ is the vanishing locus of $$p$$ and $$G_0 =
G\times_S S_0$$, then the sequence

$$G_0 \xrightarrow{F} G_0^{(p)} \xrightarrow{V} G_0$$

is exact. There is a map $$\dX_k \to \dX_{k-1}$$ sending $$G$$ to
$$G[p^{k-1}]$$.  It follows from classical descent theory that both $$\M_p(n)$$
and $$\dX_k$$ are fpqc stacks, and it is also clear that $$\M_p(n) \to
\varprojlim \dX_k$$ is an isomorphism. It therefore suffices to show that
$$\dX_k$$ is an Artin stack for each $$k$$.

Let us fix some $$k\geq 1$$, and argue that $$\dX_k$$ is an Artin stack. Define
a stack $$\wt{\dX}_k$$ as follows: an $$S$$-point of $$\wt{\dX}_k$$ is a
$$1$$-dimensional $$k$$-truncated Barsotti-Tate group $$q:G\to S$$ along with
an isomorphism $$\alpha:q_\ast \co_X \xrightarrow{\sim} \co_S^{p^{nk}}$$ of
$$\co_S$$-modules. There is clearly a morphism of stacks $$f:\wt{\dX}_k \to
\dX_k$$, which makes $$\wt{\dX}_k$$ into an fppf $$\GL_{p^{nk}}$$-torsor over
$$\dX_k$$. By definition, $$\dX_k$$ is the stack quotient
$$\wt{\dX}_k/\GL_{p^{nk}}$$, so by Example 4.6.1 of
[Laumon--Moret-Bailly](https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007%2F978-3-540-24899-6),
it suffices to show that $$\wt{\dX}_k$$ is a scheme. In fact, we will show that
$$\wt{\dX}_k$$ is a quasi-affine scheme of finite type over $$\spec \Z_p$$.

The moduli problem $$\wt{\dX}_k$$ lands in sets, and so we have to show that
the fpqc sheaf $$\wt{\dX}_k$$ is representable by a quasi-affine scheme of
finite type. We do so by proving that there is a open immersion from
$$\wt{\dX}_k$$ into a quasi-affine scheme of finite type. Let $$Y$$ denote the
finite type quasi-affine scheme over $$\spec \Z_p$$ classifying finite flat
group schemes $$G=\spec A$$ along with an isomorphism $$A\simeq
\co_S^{p^{nk}}$$. To apply this to $$\wt{\dX}_k$$, we also need to require
that the completion of $$A$$ at the group identity is $$1$$-dimensional over
$$S$$; but this is a closed condition, so we obtain a cloed subscheme $$Z$$ of
$$Y$$. Asking that $$A$$ be killed by $$p^k$$ defines a closed subscheme $$Z(k)$$
of $$Z$$. There is a canonical morphism $$\wt{\dX}_k \to Z(k)$$, so it suffices
to prove that this is a open immersion. The only condition missing from the
moduli problem defining $$Z(k)$$ is the condition that the $$p^k$$-torsion
group scheme $$G$$ be flat over $$\Z/p^k$$.

By Lemma I.1.1 of [Messing](https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/BFb0058301),
this is equivalent to asking for the exactness of the sequence

$$G\xrightarrow{[p^i]} G \xrightarrow{[p^{n-i}]} G$$

for $$k\geq 2$$, and the exactness of

$$G\times_S S_0 \xrightarrow{F} (G\times_S S_0)^{(p)} \xrightarrow{V} G\times_S
S_0$$

for $$k=1$$, over $$S$$, where, as before, $$S_0$$ is the vanishing locus of
$$p$$ in $$S$$. There is an induced map $$[p^i]':G \to \ker([p^{n-i}])$$ if
$$k\geq 2$$ (resp. $$F':G\times_S S_0 \to \ker(V)$$ if $$k=1$$). We know that
$$\wt{\dX}_k(S)$$ is the set of $$s\in S$$ such that $$[p^i]'$$ (resp. $$F'$$)
is an epimorphism at $$s$$; this is equal to the set of $$s\in S$$ for which
$$[p^i]'$$ (resp. $$F'$$) is faithfully flat at $$s$$. By Proposition 12.3.3 of
EGA IV, we know that $$\wt{\dX}_k(S)$$ is open in $$Z(k)(S)$$, as desired.

Note that the generic fiber $$\dX_k\otimes \QQ$$ is a Deligne-Mumford stack (so
that the generic fiber of $$\M_p(n)$$ is a pro-Deligne-Mumford stack). Indeed,
in characteristic zero, every $$1$$-dimensional $$p^k$$-torsion group scheme is
finite etale, so it is etale locally isomorphic to the constant sheaf
$$(\Z/p^k)^n$$.  Therefore, $$\dX_k\otimes \QQ$$ is isomorphic to
$$\spec(\QQ)/\Aut((\Z/p^k)^n)$$; since $$\Aut((\Z/p^k)^n) = \GL_n(\Z/p^k)$$ is
a finite constant group scheme, the assertion follows. In particular, we
conclude that $$\wt{\dX}_k$$ has relative dimension $$\dim(\GL_{p^{nk}}) =
p^{2nk}$$ over $$\Z_p$$, so $$\dX_k$$ has relative dimension zero over
$$\Z_p$$.

The stack $$\M_p(n)$$ is relevant to chromatic homotopy theory, because there
is a map $$\M_p(n) \to \Mfg$$, which sends a $$p$$-divisible group to its
completion at the identity. This map, however, is pretty terribly
nonrepresentable. Consider a map $$\spec A\to \Mfg$$, classifying a
$$1$$-dimensional formal group $$H$$ of height $$\leq n$$. Then an $$R$$-point
of the pullback $$\spec A\times_{\Mfg} \M_p(n)$$ is a $$p$$-divisible group
$$G$$ over $$R$$ of height $$n$$ along with an isomorphism of the completion of
$$G$$ at the identity with the pullback of $$H$$ along the unit map $$f:A\to
R$$.  Equivalently, this is the data of an extension over $$R$$ of $$f^\ast H$$
by an etale $$p$$-divisible group. The representability of $$\M_p(n) \to
\Mfg$$ would imply that an automorphism of such an extension which is the
identity on $$f^\ast H$$ is necessarily trivial. However, this is evidently
false: if $$H$$ is of height $$h$$ and $$G$$ is the extension of $$f^\ast H$$
by a constant $$p$$-divisible group (of height $$n-h$$), then the group of
automorphisms of $$G$$ which restrict to the identity on $$f^\ast H$$ is
isomorphic to $$\GL_{n-h}(\Z_p)$$.

Nonetheless, the morphism $$f:\M_p(n) \to \Mfg$$ is flat, in the following
sense: the map $$\M_p(n)^\wedge_x \to (\Mfg)^\wedge_{f(x)}$$ is flat for every
geometric point $$x:\spec k \to \M_p(n)$$. We can assume that $$k$$ is perfect.
Now suppose that completion of $$x$$ at the identity is of height $$t\leq n$$;
then, $$(\Mfg)^\wedge_{f(x)}$$ is affine, and its coordinate ring is isomorphic
to a formal power series ring $$\W(k)[\![u_1,\cdots,u_{t-1}]\!]$$, and
$$\M_p(n)^\wedge_x$$ is isomorphic to a formal power series ring
$$\W(k)[\![u_1,\cdots,u_{n-1}]\!]$$. The induced map
$$\W(k)[\![u_1,\cdots,u_{t-1}]\!] \to \W(k)[\![u_1,\cdots,u_{n-1}]\!]$$ sends
$$u_i$$ to $$u_i$$, and is therefore flat.

Why is $$\M_p(n)$$ a better stack than the moduli of formal groups? An
important difference between the two comes from *smoothness*: the moduli stack
$$\Mfg^{\leq n}$$ of formal groups of height at most $$n$$ is not smooth. This
is because the dimension of $$\Mfg^{\leq n}$$ varies from point to point.
Indeed, if $$\Mfg^{\leq n}$$ was smooth, then the cotangent complex
$$L_{\Mfg^{\leq n}}$$ (of $$\Mfg^{\leq n}$$ over $$\Z_p$$) would be perfect
over $$\Z_p$$. But the fiber over a height $$t$$ point is a
$$(t-1)$$-dimensional vector space, so this is impossible. However, I believe
that $$\M_p(n)$$ is pro-smooth. Indeed, if we write $$\M_p(n)$$ as an inverse
limit of Artin stacks $$\dX_k$$ as above, then $$\dX_k$$ is a quotient by the
action of $$\GL_{p^{nk}}$$ of a quasi-affine scheme $$\wt{\dX}_k$$ of finite
type over $$\Z_p$$. Now, $$\GL_{p^{nk}}$$ is flat and of finite presentation
over $$\Z_p$$, so it suffices to show that $$\wt{\dX}_k$$ is smooth. I think
that this is true, but I haven't worked out a full proof yet.

In topology, the utility of the moduli stack $$\M_p(n)$$ comes from the
following theorem of Lurie's.

**Theorem (Lurie):** Let $$\M_p(n)^\et$$ denote the site of formally etale
maps $$X\to \Mfg$$ where $$X$$ is a locally Noetherian separated
Deligne-Mumford stack over a complete local ring with perfect residue field.
Then, there is an even-periodic refinement of $$\M_p(n)^\et$$; i.e., there is a
sheaf $$\co^\der$$ of even-periodic $$\Eoo$$-rings on $$\M_p(n)^\et$$ such that
if $$\spec A\to \M_p(n)$$ classifies a $$p$$-divisible group $$G$$, and $$E =
\co^\der(\spec A)$$, then the completion of $$G$$ at the identity is isomorphic
to the formal group associated to $$E$$.

Using the Serre-Tate theorem, which says that the map $$\Mell \to \M_p(n)$$ is
formally etale, we obtain a sheaf of $$\Eoo$$-rings $$\co^\der$$ on the etale
site of $$\Mell$$, which makes $$(\Mell, \co^\der)$$ into an even-periodic
refinement of $$(\Mell, \co_{\Mell})$$, whose global sections $$\Gamma(\Mell,
\co^\der)$$ is the $$p$$-complete $$\Eoo$$-ring $$\TMF$$.  Lurie's theorem also
allows for the construction of other even-periodic derived Deligne-Mumford
stacks, including an even-periodic refinement of PEL-type Shimura varieties.
Let us recall the construction of this moduli problem, following [this
article](https://www3.nd.edu/~mbehren1/papers/handbook.pdf); see also
[Behrens-Lawson](https://www3.nd.edu/~mbehren1/papers/assembly3.pdf).  Denote
by $$F$$ an imaginary quadratic extension of $$\QQ_p$$ in which $$p$$ splits as
$$u\ol{u}$$. Let $$V$$ be a $$F$$-vector space of dimension $$n$$ along with a
$$\QQ$$-valued nondegenerate Hermitian alternating form $$\langle-,-\rangle$$
on $$V$$ of signature $$(1,n-1)$$ along with an $$\co_F$$-lattice
$$\Lambda\subseteq V$$ such that $$\langle-,-\rangle$$ gives integer values on
$$\Lambda$$ and makes $$\Lambda_{(p)}$$ self-dual. Then, define a functor
$$\dX_{V,L}$$ (the "PEL Shimura variety") on $$p$$-adic schemes as follows: an
$$S$$-point of $$\dX_{V,L}$$ is a triple $$(A,\lambda,\iota)$$, where:

* $$A$$ is an abelian scheme of dimension $$n$$ over $$S$$;
* $$\lambda:A \to A^\vee$$ is a polarization on $$A$$ which is principal at
  $$p$$ with Rosati involution (recall that this is defined as follows:
given $$f\in \End(A)_{(p)}$$, we define $$f^\dagger = \lambda f^\vee
\lambda^{-1}$$; note that we need $$\lambda$$ to be principal at $$p$$ in order
for this definition to make sense) $$\dagger$$ on $$\End(A)_{(p)}$$; and
* $$\iota:\co_{F,(p)} \hookrightarrow \End(A)_{(p)}$$ is an injection of rings,
  such that $$\iota(\ol{x}) = \iota(x)^\dagger$$.

This data is subject to the following conditions:

* The splitting $$\co_{F,(p)} = \co_{F,(u)} \times \co_{F,(\ol{u})}$$ induced
  by $$p = u\ol{u}$$ gives a splitting $$A[p^\infty] = A[u^\infty] \oplus
A[\ol{u}^\infty]$$ such that $$A[u^\infty]$$ is $$1$$-dimensional; and
* For each geometric point $$s\in S$$, there is an $$\co_F$$-linear isomorphism
  $$\prod_{\ell\neq p} \Lambda^\wedge_\ell \to \prod_{\ell\neq p} T_\ell(A_s)$$
which upon rationalization sends $$\langle-,-\rangle$$ to an
$$(\AA^{p,\infty})^\times$$-multiple of the $$\lambda$$-Weil pairing.

There is therefore an isomorphism $$\lambda_\ast:A[u^\infty] \to
A[\ol{u}^\infty]^\vee$$, so $$A[u^\infty]$$ has height $$n$$. Moreover, the
deformation theory of $$A[p^\infty]$$ (and hence of $$A$$, by Serre-Tate for
abelian varieties), is controlled by the $$1$$-dimensional height $$n$$ summand
$$A[u^\infty]$$. It follows that the map $$\dX_{V,L} \to \M_p(n)$$ sending
$$(A,\lambda,\iota)$$ to $$A[u^\infty]$$ is formally etale, so Lurie's theorem
shows that there is a sheaf $$\co^\der$$ of $$\Eoo$$-rings on the etale site of
$$\dX_{V,L}$$. This gives the $$\Eoo$$-ring spectra which are often grouped
together into the term "topological automorphic forms".

In the general setting of Lurie's theorem, the map $$X\to \M_p(n)$$ is required
to be formally etale. By our discussion above, the induced map $$g:X\to \Mfg$$
is also flat. As discussed
[here](https://sites.math.northwestern.edu/~pgoerss/papers/banff.pdf), one
would also like $$g$$ to be representable; however, this is not at all
immediate from formal etaleness (a map of stacks can be formally etale without
being representable; and even if the map to $$\M_p(n)$$ is representable, the
fact that the map $$\M_p(n) \to \Mfg$$ is not representable shows that this
does not guarantee that $$g$$ is representable). Nonetheless, one can prove a
few results; I learnt the following from Lennart Meier.

Let $$X$$ denote one of $$\Mell$$ or the Shimura variety $$\dX_{V,L}$$
described above. Then the morphism $$g:X\to \Mfg$$ is representable if for
every geometric point $$x\in X$$, the endomorphism ring $$\End(x)$$ is
right-cancellable. To show this, we need to show that for every geometric point
$$x\in X$$, the map $$\Aut(x) \to \Aut(g(x))$$ is an injection. Suppose that
$$f\in \Aut(x)$$ induces the identity on $$g(x)$$, and suppose that $$f\neq
1$$. Since $$X$$ is separated, the group $$\Aut(x)$$ is finite. It follows that
there is some $$N\geq 1$$ for which $$f^N = 1$$; we are assuming that $$N\neq
1$$. This implies that $$(1+f+\cdots+f^{N-1})(f-1) = 0$$ in $$\End(x)$$, so
since $$\End(x)$$ is right-cancellable, we learn that $$1+f+\cdots+f^{N-1} =
0$$. Applying $$g$$, we find that this implies that $$N=0$$, which is a
contradiction.

Let us consider the special case of the Shimura variety construction where the
moduli problem restricts to abelian *surfaces*. In this case, the moduli
problem can be succinctly stated as follows: fix an indefinite quaternion
algebra $$D$$ over $$\QQ$$ and a maximal order $$\Lambda\subseteq D$$; then,
$$\dX_\Lambda$$ is the moduli problem classifying abelian surfaces $$A$$ along
with an action $$\Lambda \to \End(A)$$ such that for any $$A/R$$ and any $$R
\to R'$$ for which $$\Lambda \otimes R' \cong M_2(R')$$, the two summands of
$$R'\otimes_R T_e(A)$$ are locally free of rank $$1$$. See
[here](https://arxiv.org/abs/0902.2603).

Then, I claim that the maps $$\ol{\Mell} \to \Mfg$$ and $$\dX_\Lambda \to
\Mfg$$ are representable; moreover, the first morphism is quasi-affine. (I
don't know if the map $$\dX_\Lambda \to \Mfg$$ is quasi-affine in general.)
Let's first check that the morphisms are representable. In the case of
$$\Mell$$, our discussion two paragraphs above shows that it suffices to show
that $$\End(E)$$ is a domain for all generalized elliptic curves $$E$$ over a
field $$k$$. This is precisely Proposition III.4.2(c) of
[Silverman](https://www.springer.com/us/book/9780387094939) (in the smooth
case; the case of multiplicative reduction is not much harder). We now move on
to $$\dX_\Lambda$$. Clearly, it suffices to show that every nonzero
endomorphism of $$A$$ preserving the action of $$\Lambda$$ is surjective.
Assume otherwise, and let $$f:A\to A$$ be such a morphism.  First note that
$$A$$ cannot be simple: otherwise, $$\im(f)$$ is an abelian subvariety of
$$A$$, and hence would be zero. Therefore, $$\im(f)$$ is an elliptic curve, and
there is an action of $$\Lambda$$ on $$A$$.  Since $$\Lambda$$ is, by
definition, simple, the morphism $$\Lambda \to \End(\im(f))$$ is injective.
Therefore, $$\End(\im(f))$$ must have rank four (Corollary III.7.5 of
Silverman), and so this map must be an isomorphism. This is, however,
impossible: $$\Lambda$$ is indefinite, hence unramified at $$\infty$$, while
$$\End(\im(f))$$ is ramified at $$\infty$$.

It remains to show that $$\ol{\Mell} \to \Mfg$$ is quasi-affine. We first prove
that $$\ol{\Mell}\times_{\Mfg} \spec L$$ is a scheme. By representability, it
is an algebraic space. The map $$\ol{\Mell}\to \ol{\Mell}^\mathrm{coarse}$$ is
quasi-finite, so the map $$\ol{\Mell}\times_{\Mfg} \spec L\to
\ol{\Mell}^\mathrm{coarse}\times_{\Mfg} \spec L$$ is quasi-finite. It is also
separated. A theorem of Knutson's says that algebraic spaces locally
quasi-finite and separated over schemes are schemes, so
$$\ol{\Mell}\times_{\Mfg} \spec L$$ is itself a scheme. This is a faithfully
flat cover of $$\ol{\Mell}$$, and so it suffices to show that this is
quasi-affine. Consider the Hodge line bundle $$\omega$$ on $$\ol{\Mell}$$. This
is an ample line bundle, since the non-vanishing loci of the modular forms
$$c_4\in \Gamma(\ol{\Mell}, \omega^{\otimes 4})$$ and $$\Delta\in
\Gamma(\ol{\Mell}, \omega^{\otimes 12})$$ cover $$\ol{\Mell}$$ and have affine
coarse moduli space. After pulling back to $$\ol{\Mell}\times_{\Mfg} \spec L$$,
this bundle is trivialized, so the structure sheaf of $$\ol{\Mell}\times_{\Mfg}
\spec L$$ is ample, which implies that $$\ol{\Mell}\times_{\Mfg} \spec L$$ is
quasi-affine. The quasi-affineness of the map $$\ol{\Mell} \to \Mfg$$ is useful
if one wants to apply the main theorem of
[Mathew-Meier](https://arxiv.org/abs/1311.0514), for instance.
