---
layout: post
title:  "Cohen-Moore-Neisendorfer and Ravenel's spectra"
date:   2019-04-18
categories: algebraic-topology
---

<script type="text/javascript" async=""
src="https://www.google-analytics.com/analytics.js"></script>
<script async=""
src="https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtag/js?id=UA-109004213-1"></script>
<script>
  window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || [];
    function gtag(){dataLayer.push(arguments);}
      gtag('js', new Date());

        gtag('config', 'UA-109004213-1');
</script>
<script type="text/javascript"
src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML">
</script>

$$\newcommand{\KO}{\mathrm{KO}} \newcommand{\TMF}{\mathrm{TMF}}
\newcommand{\KU}{\mathrm{KU}} \newcommand{\Mfg}{M_\mathrm{fg}}
\newcommand{\spec}{\mathrm{Spec}\ } \newcommand{\dX}{\mathcal{X}}
\newcommand{\co}{\mathcal{O}} \newcommand{\Z}{\mathbf{Z}}
\newcommand{\top}{\mathrm{top}} \newcommand{\E}{\mathbf{E}}
\newcommand{\GG}{\mathbf{G}} \newcommand{\DD}{\mathbf{D}}
\newcommand{\Mell}{M_\mathrm{ell}} \newcommand{\ce}{\mathcal{E}}
\newcommand{\H}{\mathrm{H}} \newcommand{\dR}{\mathrm{dR}}
\newcommand{\cf}{\mathcal{F}} \newcommand{\FF}{\mathbf{F}}
\newcommand{\spf}{\mathrm{Spf}\ } \newcommand{\cA}{\mathcal{A}}
\newcommand{\Mcub}{M_\mathrm{cub}} \newcommand{\Mqd}{M_\mathrm{qd}}
\newcommand{\Aut}{\mathrm{Aut}} \newcommand{\tmf}{\mathrm{tmf}}
\newcommand{\Tmf}{\mathrm{Tmf}} \newcommand{\Map}{\mathrm{Map}}
\newcommand{\Ext}{\mathrm{Ext}} \newcommand{\End}{\mathrm{End}}
\newcommand{\cg}{\mathcal{G}} \newcommand{\Hom}{\mathrm{Hom}}
\newcommand{BP}[1]{\mathrm{BP}\langle #1\rangle} \newcommand{\QQ}{\mathbf{Q}}
\newcommand{\PP}{\mathbf{P}} \newcommand{\Gal}{\mathrm{Gal}}
\newcommand{\proj}{\mathrm{Proj}\ } \newcommand{\Ltwo}{L_{K(2)}}
\newcommand{\Eoo}{\mathbf{E}_\infty} \newcommand{\ol}[1]{\overline #1}
\newcommand{\pic}{\mathrm{Pic}} \newcommand{\RP}{\mathbf{R}P}
\newcommand{\BO}{\mathrm{BO}} \newcommand{\cc}{\mathbf{C}}
\newcommand{\CP}{\mathbf{C}P} \newcommand{\wt}[1]{\widetilde #1}
\newcommand{\RR}{\mathbf{R}} \renewcommand{\S}{\mathbb{S}}
\newcommand{\Lone}{L_{K(1)}} \newcommand{\Ltwo}{L_{K(2)}}
\newcommand{\gl}{\mathrm{gl}} \newcommand{\Lk}{L_{K(n)}}
\newcommand{\ku}{\mathrm{ku}} \newcommand{\ko}{\mathrm{ko}}
\newcommand{\GL}{\mathrm{GL}} \newcommand{\Ln}{L_n}
\newcommand{\Lt}{L_{K(t)}} \newcommand{\W}{\mathrm{W}}
\newcommand{\BU}{\mathrm{BU}} \newcommand{\SU}{\mathrm{SU}}
\newcommand{\MU}{\mathrm{MU}} \newcommand{\ul}[1]{\underline #1}
\newcommand{\Sq}{\mathrm{Sq}} \newcommand{\Tr}{\mathrm{Tr}}
\newcommand{\d}{\mathrm{d}} \newcommand{\HP}{\mathbf{H}P}$$

It's been a long time. In [the previous
post](/algebraic-topology/2019/04/01/mrs.html), we asked whether the
"$$\E_2$$-quotient" of $$T(n)$$ "by $$v_n$$" is "$$\BP{n-1}$$". Lots of scare
quotes there. I gave a sketch of the story one might want to run, but I'd like
to be more precise in this post. 

Last time, we constructed a fiber sequence

$$\Omega S^{2p-1} \to \Omega^2 S^3\langle 3\rangle \to \Omega^2 S^{2p+1}
(\ast),$$

where the first map detects $$\alpha_1$$. This comes by looping the
Cohen-Moore-Neisendorfer-Anick fibration. The map $$\Omega^2 S^3\langle
3\rangle \to B\GL_1(\S)$$ Thomifies to $$\H\Z_p$$, and the induced bundle over
$$\Omega S^{2p-1}$$ Thomifies to $$T(1)$$. We therefore get a map $$f:\Omega^2
S^{2p+1} \to B\GL_1(T(1))$$ which Thomifies to $$\H\Z_p$$. The element detected
by $$f$$ lives in degree $$\pi_{2p-1}(T(1)) \cong \pi_{2p-1}(\mathrm{BP})$$.
One needs to check that this element is not divisible by $$p$$; if it was, then
since the composite $$S^{2p-1} \to \Omega^2 S^{2p+1} \to S^{2p-1}$$ is
multiplication by $$p$$, the element $$f\in \pi_{2p-1}(T(1))$$ is divisible by
$$p$$ if and only if $$f$$ factors through the Cohen-Moore-Neisendorfer map
$$\Omega^2 S^{2p+1} \to S^{2p-1}$$. Since there is a fiber sequence

$$\Omega^2 S^3\langle 3\rangle \to \Omega^2 S^{2p+1} \to S^{2p-1},$$

this would imply that the map $$\Omega^2 S^3\langle 3\rangle \to B\GL_1(T(1))$$
is null, i.e., that you have a map $$\H\Z \to T(1)$$, which necessarily splits
the orientation $$T(1) \to \H\Z$$. That's absurd (check on homology).

This result already seems to be new, and raises numerous interesting questions.
For instance, consider the operadic filtration of $$\Omega^2 S^{2p+1}$$. Upon
Thomifying, the above result gives rise to a $$T(1)$$-module filtration of
$$\H\Z$$. How does this filtration relate to the Brown-Gitler filtration of
$$\H\Z$$? I expect that the answer comes from understanding $$(\ast)$$ as a
fiber sequence of *filtered* $$\E_{1}$$-spaces.

Let's move on to the general case. We know, by the discussion in the previous
post, that there is a fiber sequence

$$\Omega S^{2p^n-1} \to \Omega T^{2p^n+1}(p^k) \to \Omega^2 S^{2p^n+1}
(\ast\ast),$$

where $$T^{2p^n+1}(p^k)$$ is called an Anick space, and the connecting map
$$\Omega^2 S^{2p^n+1} \to S^{2p^n-1}$$ gives the degree $$p^k$$ map on
$$S^{2p^n-1}$$ upon composition with the double suspension. Let $$k$$ denote
the integer such that $$\pi_{2p^n-3}(T(n-1)) \cong \Z/p^k$$. What we're now
reduced to is constructing a map $$\mu:\Omega T^{2p^n+1}(p^k) \to
B\GL_1(T(n-1))$$ whose Thom spectrum $$(\Omega T^{2p^n+1}(p^k))^\mu$$ is an
$$\E_{2}$$-ring, and admits an $$\E_{2}$$-map to $$\BP{n-1}$$. Once we have this
$$\E_{2}$$-map $$(\Omega T^{2p^n+1}(p^k))^\mu \to \BP{n-1}$$, the usual
Dyer-Lashof hopping argument will allow us to conclude that this map is an
equivalence.

There are a few immediate obstructions: first, I don't know if $$T(n-1)$$ is an
$$\E_{2}$$-ring; second, I don't know if $$\Omega T^{2p^n+1}(p^k)$$ is an
$$\E_{2}$$-space. How, then, do we obtain an $$\E_{2}$$-ring structure on
$$(\Omega T^{2p^n+1}(p^k))^\mu$$? I'll come back to this in a bit; let's first
try to construct a map $$\mu:\Omega T^{2p^n+1}(p^k) \to B\GL_1(T(n-1))$$. A
conjecture of Gray's says that $$\Omega T^{2p^n+1}(p^k)$$ splits off $$\Omega^2
P^{2p^n+1}(p^k)$$ for all $$k\geq 1$$ and all $$p\geq 3$$. Since $$T(n-1)$$
splits off of $$X(p^n-1)$$ in an $$\E_1$$-manner, it suffices to construct a
map $$\Omega^2 P^{2p^n+1}(p^k) \to B\GL_1(X(p^n-1))$$.

We run into a structural issue (again!): since $$\Omega^2 P^{2p^n+1}(p^k) =
\Omega^2 \Sigma^2 P^{2p^n-1}(p^k)$$, we'd be done if $$X(p^n-1)$$ was an
$$\E_3$$-ring, and we could construct a map $$P^{2p^n-1}(p^k) \to
B\GL_1(X(p^n-1))$$. But $$X(p^n-1)$$ is *not* an $$\E_{3}$$-ring! Nonetheless,
we *can* construct a map

$$P^{2p^n-1}(p^k) = S^{2p^n-2}/p^k \to B\GL_1(X(p^n-1)).$$

Indeed, consider the element $$\sigma_{n-1}\in \pi_{2p^n-2} B\GL_1(X(p^n-1))$$;
by our choice of $$k$$, this element is $$p^k$$-torsion, so we can extend the
map $$S^{2p^n-2}\to B\GL_1(X(p^n-1))$$ to a map from $$P^{2p^n-1}(p^k)$$. The
collection of such extensions is a torsor over $$\pi_{2p^n-2} X(p^n-1) \cong
\pi_{2p^n-2} \mathrm{BP}$$ --- and this group is huge! Indecomposables living
in this degree, are precisely choices of the element $$v_n$$. Choose a
bijection between the collection of such extensions and $$\pi_{2p^n-2}
X(p^n-1)$$, and make a choice of $$v_n$$ (perhaps we can do something canonical
here, but let's return back to this later); then, we get a map
$$P^{2p^n-1}(p^k) \to B\GL_1(X(p^n-1))$$, as desired.

As I said before, the failure of $$X(p^n-1)$$ to be an $$\E_3$$-ring implies
that we can't necessarily extend this map to $$\Omega^2 P^{2p^n+1}(p^k)$$.
*However*, there's a potential fix. There's a universal $$\E_3$$-ring with an
$$\E_2$$-map to $$X(p^n-1)$$; this is the $$\E_2$$-topological Hochschild
cohomology of $$X(p^n-1)$$. The main theorem (on page 3) of [this
paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1606.03805.pdf) shows that this $$\E_3$$-ring is
$$\Map_{\Sigma^\infty_+ \SU(p^n-1)}(\S, X(p^n-1)) = X(p^n-1)^{h\SU(p^n-1)}$$,
where the action of $$\SU(p^n-1)$$ on $$X(p^n-1)$$ comes by the conjugation
action (using the group structure) of $$\SU(p^n-1)$$ on $$\Omega \SU(p^n-1)$$.
So: if our element $$\sigma_{n-1}\in \pi_\ast X(p^n-1)$$ is *central*, i.e., is
in the image of the canonical map $$X(p^n-1)^{h\SU(p^n-1)} \to X(p^n-1)$$, and
it is still $$p^k$$-torsion in there, *then* we get a map

$$P^{2p^n-1}(p^k) \to B\GL_1(X(p^n-1)^{h\SU(p^n-1)});$$

note that the collection of such maps are in noncanonical bijection with
$$\pi_{2p^n-2} X(p^n-1)^{h\SU(p^n-1)}$$; and this map extends to $$\Omega^2
P^{2p^n+1}(p^k)$$. Let's talk about whether this is true below. OK, so we have
a map

$$g:\Omega^2 P^{2p^n+1}(p^k) \to B\GL_1(X(p^n-1)^{h\SU(p^n-1)}) \to
B\GL_1(X(p^n-1)).$$

This gives us the desired map $$\mu:\Omega T^{2p^n+1}(p^k) \to
B\GL_1(T(n-1))$$. The map $$g$$ is $$\E_{1}$$, so the Thom spectrum $$(\Omega^2
P^{2p^n+1}(p^k))^g$$ is an $$\E_{1}$$-ring. Moreover, $$(\Omega
T^{2p^n+1}(p^k))^\mu$$ splits off $$(\Omega^2 P^{2p^n+1}(p^k))^g$$ by
$$\E_1$$-maps.

Let's now return to the question of whether the Thom spectrum $$(\Omega
T^{2p^n+1}(p^k))^\mu$$ is an $$\E_2$$-ring. I'd like to conjecture that
$$(\Omega^2 P^{2p^n+1}(p^k))^g$$ in fact admits the structure of an
$$\E_{2}$$-ring, and that $$(\Omega T^{2p^n+1}(p^k))^\mu$$ splits off
$$(\Omega^2 P^{2p^n+1}(p^k))^g$$ by $$\E_2$$-maps. 

What about constructing the $$\E_2$$-map $$(\Omega T^{2p^n+1}(p^k))^\mu \to
\BP{n-1}$$?  Suppose that the composite $$X(p^n-1)^{h\SU(p^n-1)} \to X(p^n-1)
\to \mathrm{BP}$$ is an $$\E_3$$-map. Then we have an $$\E_2$$-map 

$$\Omega^2 P^{2p^n+1}(p^k) \to B\GL_1(X(p^n-1)^{h\SU(p^n-1)}) \to
B\GL_1(\mathrm{BP}).$$

By the $$\E_2$$-ness of this map, it's determined by what happens on the bottom
copy of $$P^{2p^n-1}(p^k)$$. The map from the bottom cell of this object to
$$B\GL_1(\mathrm{BP})$$ is null, because $$\mathrm{BP}$$ has no odd-dimensional
homotopy. There's therefore an extension of the map from $$P^{2p^n-1}(p^k)$$ to
a map from the top cell, which is $$S^{2p^n-1}$$. The resulting map
$$S^{2p^n-1} \to B\GL_1(\mathrm{BP})$$ detects an element in
$$\pi_{2p^n-2}(\mathrm{BP})$$ --- and the choice of such an extension
corresponds exactly to the choice of an element $$\pi_{2p^n-2} X(p^n-1)$$ that
we made earlier when constructing the map $$P^{2p^n-1}(p^k) \to B\GL_1
X(p^n-1)$$. Having already chosen this to be an indecomposable, we find that
the composite

$$\Omega^2 P^{2p^n+1}(p^k) \to B\GL_1(X(p^n-1)^{h\SU(p^n-1)}) \to
B\GL_1(\mathrm{BP}) \to B\GL_1(\BP{n-1})$$

is null, because all indecomposables in degree $$2p^n-2$$ die in $$\BP{n-1}$$.
By general Thom spectra machinery, we get an $$\E_1$$-map $$(\Omega
T^{2p^n+1}(p^k))^\mu \to \BP{n-1}$$, and I expect this to be an $$\E_2$$-map.
If we have all of this, then we're done. 

That's a lot of stuff, so let's summarize what we've assumed:

1. The element $$\sigma_{n-1} \in \pi_{2p^n-3} X(p^n-1)$$ should be central,
   i.e., come from $$X(p^n-1)^{h\SU(p^n-1)}$$; moreover, it's $$p^k$$-torsion
in $$\pi_\ast X(p^n-1)^{h\SU(p^n-1)}$$.
2. $$(\Omega^2 P^{2p^n+1}(p^k))^g$$ in fact admits the structure of an
   $$\E_{2}$$-ring, and that $$(\Omega T^{2p^n+1}(p^k))^\mu$$ is an
$$\E_2$$-ring which splits off $$(\Omega^2 P^{2p^n+1}(p^k))^g$$ by
$$\E_2$$-maps.
3. The composite $$X(p^n-1)^{h\SU(p^n-1)} \to X(p^n-1) \to \mathrm{BP}$$ is an
   $$\E_3$$-map.
4. We chose a bijection between the collection of extensions of $$S^{2p^n-2}
   \to B\GL_1(X(p^n-1))$$ to $$P^{2p^n-2}(p^k)$$ and $$\pi_{2p^n-2} X(p^n-1)$$,
and made a choice of $$v_n\in \pi_\ast \mathrm{BP}$$.

Let me make some remarks. There's a clever way of phrasing (4) in such a way
that the two times it's used above cancel each other out. All we need to show
is that there is a choice of extension (dotted arrow) in the below diagram such
that there is a choice of indecomposable element $$S^{2p^n-2} \to \mathrm{BP}$$
for which the following diagram commutes:

$$\require{AMScd}\begin{CD}
    P^{2p^n-3}(p^k) @>>> S^{2p^n-2}\\
    @V {\sigma_{n-1}} V V @VV \mathrm{indecomposable} V\\
    X(p^n-1) @>>> \mathrm{BP}
\end{CD}$$

The left vertical map should be dotted, but I don't know how to do that in
AMScd.

As for (2): I think that showing that $$(\Omega^2
P^{2p^n+1}(p^k))^g$$ admits the structure of an $$\E_{2}$$-ring shouldn't be
too hard (and is in fact probably obvious?), but showing that $$(\Omega
T^{2p^n+1}(p^k))^\mu$$ is an $$\E_2$$-ring which splits off $$(\Omega^2
P^{2p^n+1}(p^k))^g$$ by $$\E_2$$-maps should be of equivalent difficulty to
proving that $$T(n)$$ is an $$\E_2$$-ring. Perhaps $$T(n)$$ being $$\E_2$$ in
fact implies (2).

The "most approachable" part of this is (1). It seems apt to remark that Jeremy
Hahn and Mike Hopkins had thought about proving a result like
"$$T(n)/\!\!/_{\E_2} v_n = \BP{n-1}$$" before, but their approach was to try to
prove that $$v_n$$ was central in $$X(p^n-1)$$. This seemed to be really hard:
the element $$v_n$$ is a purely algebraic thing (it's also not well-defined;
but I guess we made a choice, too), and so it's quite hard to show that it
comes from $$X(p^n-1)^{h\SU(p^n-1)}$$, where the $$\SU(p^n-1)$$ action is
defined geometrically. 

Here's a small piece of evidence for (1): let $$R$$ be a $$p$$-local
$$\E_{2}$$-ring for odd $$p$$, and let $$\alpha\in \pi_{2n-1} R$$ be an element
in odd degree. The map $$\alpha:S^{2n-1} \to R$$ extends to an $$\E_{2}$$-map
$$\Sigma^\infty_+ \Omega^2 S^{2n+1} \to R$$. A result of Serre's says that there
is an equivalence $$\Omega S^{2m} \simeq \Omega S^{4m-1} \times S^{2m-1}$$,
induced by the suspension on $$S^{2m-1}$$ and the Whitehead product
$$[\iota,\iota]: S^{4m-1} \to S^{2m}$$. Therefore, there is an
$$\E_{2}$$-equivalence $$\Omega^3 S^{2n+2} \simeq \Omega^3 S^{4n+3} \times
\Omega^2 S^{2n+1}$$. We conclude that there is an $$\E_{2}$$-map
$$\Sigma^\infty_+ \Omega^3 S^{2n+2} \to R$$, i.e., an $$\E_{1}$$-map $$\Omega^2
S^{2n+2} \to B\GL_1(R)$$. Nothing about this discussion is special to the
element $$\sigma_{n-1}$$, though; I think that constructing the extension of the
map $$\Omega^2 S^{2p^n} \to B\GL_1(X(p^n-1))$$ constructed above to $$\Omega^2
S^{2p^n}/p^k$$ will be the challenging part of this program.

Note that the composite

$$\Omega^2 S^{2p^n} \to \Omega^2 S^{2p^n}/p^k \xrightarrow{??} B\GL_1(X(p^n-1))
\to B\GL_1(\mathrm{BP})$$

then factors through $$\Omega S^{2p^n-1}$$, and hence is null (since the
composite is an $$\E_1$$-map and is therefore determined by its effect on the
bottom cell). In particular, item (3) is unnecessary (recall that the only
reason for wanting (3) is since we needed the giant composite above to be null).
So, really, we only need items (1) and (2).

(Added later: in fact, item (2) can be made even weaker: the Dyer-Lashof hopping
argument only needs $$Q_1$$ to exist, for which you don't need the entire
$$\E_2$$-structure --- it already exists in the homology of a homotopy
commutative ring!)
