---
layout: post
title:  "Hodge theory and Hopf invariant one"
date:   2019-02-12 
categories: chromotopy
---

<script type="text/javascript" async=""
src="https://www.google-analytics.com/analytics.js"></script>
<script async=""
src="https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtag/js?id=UA-109004213-1"></script>
<script>
  window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || [];
    function gtag(){dataLayer.push(arguments);}
      gtag('js', new Date());

        gtag('config', 'UA-109004213-1');
</script>
<script type="text/javascript"
src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML">
</script>

$$\newcommand{\KO}{\mathrm{KO}} \newcommand{\TMF}{\mathrm{TMF}}
\newcommand{\KU}{\mathrm{KU}} \newcommand{\Mfg}{M_\mathrm{fg}}
\newcommand{\spec}{\mathrm{Spec}\ } \newcommand{\dX}{\mathcal{X}}
\newcommand{\co}{\mathcal{O}} \newcommand{\Z}{\mathbf{Z}}
\newcommand{\top}{\mathrm{top}} \newcommand{\E}{\mathbf{E}}
\newcommand{\GG}{\mathbf{G}} \newcommand{\DD}{\mathbf{D}}
\newcommand{\Mell}{M_\mathrm{ell}} \newcommand{\ce}{\mathcal{E}}
\newcommand{\H}{\mathrm{H}} \newcommand{\dR}{\mathrm{dR}}
\newcommand{\cf}{\mathcal{F}}$$
Let $$X$$ be a Noetherian and separated Deligne-Mumford stack along with a flat
and *affine* map $$X\to \Mfg$$, and let $$\Mfg^{(n)}$$ denote the moduli stack
of formal groups along with a chosen coordinate up to degree $$n+1$$. Then,
there is some $$N\geq 0$$ such that the pullback $$X\times_{\Mfg} \Mfg^{(N)}$$
is affine. Indeed, we know that $$\Mfg^{(\infty)} = \spec L$$, where $$L$$ is
the Lazard ring, so $$X\times_{\Mfg} \Mfg^{(\infty)}$$ is affine because the
morphism $$X\to \Mfg$$ is affine. By [Lemma
07SQ](https://stacks.math.columbia.edu/tag/07SQ) of the Stacks project, it
suffices to prove that there is some $$N$$ for which $$X\times_{\Mfg}
\Mfg^{(N)}$$ is an *algebraic space*. Each $$X\times_{\Mfg} \Mfg^{(N)}$$ is a
Deligne-Mumford stack, and since a Deligne-Mumford stack is an algebraic space
if and only if its diagonal is a closed embedding, we can conclude by using
Theorem 8.10.5 of EGA IV(!) to conclude that the diagonal of some
$$X\times_{\Mfg} \Mfg^{(N)}$$ must be a closed embedding.

We know that the stack associated to the Thom spectrum $$X(n) = (\Omega
SU(n))^\xi$$ (i.e, the stack associated to the Hopf algebroid $$(MU_\ast X(n),
MU_\ast MU \otimes_{MU_\ast} MU_\ast X(n))$$) is the stack $$\Mfg^{(n)}$$.
Suppose that the morphism $$X\to \Mfg$$ admits an even-periodic refinement to
an even-periodic Deligne-Mumford stack $$\dX$$. Let $$A = \Gamma(\dX,
\co_\dX)$$. Since the morphism $$X\to \Mfg$$ is affine, we know that $$X$$ is
the stack associated to $$A$$ (see Theorem 4 of [this
document](http://www.mit.edu/~sanathd/wood.pdf)). It follows that the stack
associated to $$A\wedge X(n)$$ is the stack $$X\times_{\Mfg} \Mfg^{(n)}$$.
Since this is affine for some $$n=N$$, we conclude that there is some $$N$$ for
which $$A\wedge X(N)$$ is complex-oriented.

Let us explore the situation in a concrete example. Let $$X$$ be the
classifying stack $$B\Z/2 = B\mathrm{Aut}(\mathbf{G}_m)$$. This classifies
algebraic tori, i.e., algebraic groups which become isomorphic to
$$\mathbf{G}_m$$ after a faithfully flat extension. There is a map $$B\Z/2 \to
\Mfg$$ sending a group to its completion at the identity component. Moreover,
this morphism is affine. This is equivalent to the claim that the stack
$$B\Z/2\times_{\Mfg} \spec L$$ is affine. The moduli problem that this stack
classifies is algebraic tori along with a coordinate; if $$f:T\to T'$$ is a map
of tori which induces the identity on its completion (up to order three), then
$$f$$ is the identity. It follows that there are no nontrivial automorphisms in
the moduli problem, so $$B\Z/2\times_{\Mfg} \spec L$$ is affine, as desired. In
fact, this shows that $$B\Z/2\times_{\Mfg} \Mfg^{(2)}$$ is affine.

The morphism $$B\Z/2\to \Mfg$$ admits an even-periodic refinement to a stack
$$B\Z/2^\top$$, and $$\Gamma(B\Z/2^\top, \co_{B\Z/2^\top}) = \KO$$. We
therefore learn that $$\KO\wedge X(2)$$ is affine. The spectrum $$\KO$$ isn't
very interesting when localized at primes bigger than $$3$$, so we will now
localize at the prime $$2$$. Then, $$X(2)$$ is also known as $$T(1)$$; this is
the free $$\E_{1}$$-ring with a (chosen) nullhomotopy of $$\eta$$ (this is true
even before $$2$$-localization). In particular, $$\KO\wedge X(2)$$ is the free
$$\E_{1}$$-$$\KO$$-algebra with a nullhomotopy of $$\eta$$. (Note that $$X(2)$$
is actually an $$\E_{2}$$-ring: it is the Thom spectrum of a bundle over
$$\Omega SU(2)$$, and this deloops twice to $$\mathbf{H}P^\infty$$; moreover,
the map $$\Omega SU(2) \to BU$$ is an $$\E_{2}$$-ring map.)

What *is* a nullhomotopy of $$\eta$$ in a ring spectrum $$A$$? It's a choice of
factorization of the unit $$S\to A$$ through the $$2$$-cell complex $$C\eta$$.
Assume that $$A$$ is even-periodic and complex oriented, and let $$q:\GG \to
\spec \pi_0 A$$ denote the associated formal group. Then $$\pi_2 A \cong \omega
= q_\ast \Omega^1_{\GG/\pi_0 A}$$. The cofiber sequence $$S^{-2} \to
\Sigma^{-2} C\eta \to S$$ gives an exact sequence of vector bundles on $$\spec
\pi_0 A$$:

$$0 \to \pi_0 A \to A^2(C\eta) \to \pi_{-2} A = \omega^{-1} \to 0. \qquad
(\ast)$$

In general, one can construct such an exact sequence for an even-periodic
refinement of a non-affine Deligne-Mumford stack $$X$$ (like $$B\Z/2$$), and
one obtains a similar extension as an element of
$$\mathrm{Ext}^1_X(\omega^{-1}, \co_X)$$, where $$\omega$$ is again the "Lie
algebra" sheaf on $$X$$. The choice of a nullhomotopy of $$\eta$$ is then
equivalent to the data of a splitting of this exact sequence. The space of such
splittings is $$\mathrm{Hom}_X(\omega^{-1}, \co_X) = \Gamma(X;\omega)$$. This
is the algebraic analogue of the fact that $$\pi_2$$ parametrizes
nullhomotopies of $$\eta$$.

Since $$\eta$$ is not nullhomotopic in $$\KO$$, the element of
$$\mathrm{Ext}^1_X(\omega^{-1}, \co_X)$$ classifying $$\eta$$ is nontrivial.
Then, one can use the above discussion to observe that $$B\Z/2\times_{\Mfg}
\Mfg^{(2)}$$ is the universal stack (scheme) over $$B\Z/2$$ with a chosen
trivialization of this exact sequence. We conclude that the moduli problem
associated to $$\KO\wedge X(2)$$ classifies algebraic tori along with a chosen
splitting of the exact sequence $$(\ast)$$ (which corresponds to a chosen
global section of $$\omega$$).

This could've also been deduced by looking at the definition of a coordinate up
to degree $$3$$, but there's a reason we went through all of this effort: it
helps us generalize to higher heights. The next most manageable and interesting
case is $$\TMF$$. In this case, $$X$$ is the moduli stack $$\Mell$$ of smooth
elliptic curves, and the morphism $$\Mell \to \Mfg$$ is again affine. We
conclude that there is some $$N$$ such that $$\Mell\times_{\Mfg} \Mfg^{(N)}$$
is affine. In fact, one can show that $$N=4$$ works. If we localize at the
prime $$3$$, then $$N=3$$ works, so (we will now $$3$$-localize) $$\TMF \wedge
X(3)$$ is complex oriented. The spectrum $$X(3)$$ splits up (since we
$$3$$-localized) into a wedge of homotopy commutative ring spectra denoted
$$T(1)$$, in much the same way as $$MU$$ splits up into a wedge of copies of
$$BP$$. The spectrum $$T(1)$$ is the free $$\E_1$$-ring with a chosen
nullhomotopy of $$\alpha_1$$, and $$\TMF \wedge T(1)$$ is complex oriented.

Let us analyze the moduli problem associated to $$\TMF \wedge T(1)$$ in the
same way as we did for $$\KO\wedge T(1)$$. The element $$\alpha_1$$ is nonzero
in $$\TMF$$. If $$q:\ce\to \Mell$$ denotes the universal elliptic curve
over $$\Mell$$, then denoting $$\omega = q_\ast \Omega^1_{\ce/\Mell}$$, we have
an exact sequence

$$0\to \pi_2 \co_{\Mell^\top} = \omega \to \cf(\Sigma^{-2} C\alpha_1) \to
\omega^{-1} = \pi_{-2} \co_{\Mell^\top} \to 0, \qquad (\ast\ast)$$

where $$\cf(\Sigma^{-2} C\alpha_1)$$ is the sheaf on $$\Mell$$ whose global
sections is $$\TMF\wedge \Sigma^{-2} C\alpha_1$$. This exact sequence is an
element of $$\mathrm{Ext}^1_X(\omega^{-1}, \omega)$$ detecting $$\alpha_1$$.

The exact sequence $$(\ast\ast)$$ is familiar to arithmetic geometers: it's
almost exactly the Hodge-de Rham exact sequence! If $$\H^1_\dR(\ce/\Mell)$$
denotes the de Rham cohomology of $$\ce$$ (really, regarded as a sheaf on
$$\Mell$$), then there is an exact sequence

$$0 \to q_\ast \Omega^1_{\ce/\Mell} = \omega \to
\H^1_\dR(\ce/\Mell) \to R^1 q_\ast \co_\ce \cong \omega^{-1} \to 0, \qquad
(\ast\ast\ast)$$

where we've implicitly used Serre duality above. (Note that
$$\H^1_\dR(\ce/\Mell)$$ is the Dieudonne module of the $$3$$-divisible group
$$\ce[3^\infty]$$ over $$\Mell$$.) Both exact sequences $$(\ast\ast)$$ and
$$(\ast\ast\ast)$$ lie inside $$\mathrm{Ext}^1_X(\omega^{-1}, \omega) \cong
\H^1(\Mell; \omega^2)$$. This can be directly computed: it is exactly $$\Z/3$$.
Since both exact sequences are nontrivial, we conclude that they are either
equal (in which case $$\H^1_\dR(\ce/\Mell) \cong \cf(\Sigma^{-2} C\alpha_1)$$)
or one is twice the other (under the Baer sum). In any case, we find that
choosing a nullhomotopy of $$\alpha_1$$ in a $$\TMF$$-algebra is equivalent to
choosing a splitting of the Hodge-de Rham exact sequence. In particular, the
moduli problem associated to $$\TMF\wedge T(1)$$ classifies elliptic curves
along with a chosen splitting of the Hodge-de Rham exact sequence. More
generally, one could replace $$\TMF$$ with any $$\E_\infty$$-ring obtained as
the global sections of a sheaf of $$\E_\infty$$-rings on an even-periodic
refinement of a formally etale map $$X \to M_3(2)$$ from a Noetherian and
separated Deligne-Mumford stack classifying a $$3$$-divisible group of height
$$2$$.

It would be very interesting to generalize these observations to higher
heights, since $$\alpha_1$$ is detected at height $$p-1$$.
