---
layout: post
title:  "Dijkgraaf-Witten theory"
date:   2019-06-01
categories: physics
---

<script type="text/javascript" async=""
src="https://www.google-analytics.com/analytics.js"></script>
<script async=""
src="https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtag/js?id=UA-109004213-1"></script>
<script>
  window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || [];
    function gtag(){dataLayer.push(arguments);}
      gtag('js', new Date());

        gtag('config', 'UA-109004213-1');
</script>
<script type="text/javascript"
src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML">
</script>

$$\newcommand{\KO}{\mathrm{KO}} \newcommand{\TMF}{\mathrm{TMF}}
\newcommand{\KU}{\mathrm{KU}} \newcommand{\Mfg}{M_\mathrm{fg}}
\newcommand{\spec}{\mathrm{Spec}\ } \newcommand{\dX}{\mathcal{X}}
\newcommand{\co}{\mathcal{O}} \newcommand{\Z}{\mathbf{Z}}
\newcommand{\top}{\mathrm{top}} \newcommand{\E}{\mathbf{E}}
\newcommand{\GG}{\mathbf{G}} \newcommand{\DD}{\mathbf{D}}
\newcommand{\Mell}{M_\mathrm{ell}} \newcommand{\ce}{\mathcal{E}}
\newcommand{\H}{\mathrm{H}} \newcommand{\dR}{\mathrm{dR}}
\newcommand{\cf}{\mathcal{F}} \newcommand{\FF}{\mathbf{F}}
\newcommand{\spf}{\mathrm{Spf}\ } \newcommand{\cA}{\mathcal{A}}
\newcommand{\Mcub}{M_\mathrm{cub}} \newcommand{\Mqd}{M_\mathrm{qd}}
\newcommand{\Aut}{\mathrm{Aut}} \newcommand{\tmf}{\mathrm{tmf}}
\newcommand{\Tmf}{\mathrm{Tmf}} \newcommand{\Map}{\mathrm{Map}}
\newcommand{\Ext}{\mathrm{Ext}} \newcommand{\End}{\mathrm{End}}
\newcommand{\cg}{\mathcal{G}} \newcommand{\Hom}{\mathrm{Hom}}
\newcommand{BP}[1]{\mathrm{BP}\langle #1\rangle} \newcommand{\QQ}{\mathbf{Q}}
\newcommand{\PP}{\mathbf{P}} \newcommand{\Gal}{\mathrm{Gal}}
\newcommand{\proj}{\mathrm{Proj}\ } \newcommand{\Ltwo}{L_{K(2)}}
\newcommand{\Eoo}{\mathbf{E}_\infty} \newcommand{\ol}[1]{\overline #1}
\newcommand{\pic}{\mathrm{Pic}} \newcommand{\RP}{\mathbf{R}P}
\newcommand{\BO}{\mathrm{BO}} \newcommand{\cc}{\mathbf{C}}
\newcommand{\CP}{\mathbf{C}P} \newcommand{\wt}[1]{\widetilde #1}
\newcommand{\RR}{\mathbf{R}} \renewcommand{\S}{\mathbb{S}}
\newcommand{\Lone}{L_{K(1)}} \newcommand{\Ltwo}{L_{K(2)}}
\newcommand{\gl}{\mathrm{gl}} \newcommand{\Lk}{L_{K(n)}}
\newcommand{\ku}{\mathrm{ku}} \newcommand{\ko}{\mathrm{ko}}
\newcommand{\GL}{\mathrm{GL}} \newcommand{\Ln}{L_n}
\newcommand{\Lt}{L_{K(t)}} \newcommand{\W}{\mathrm{W}}
\newcommand{\BU}{\mathrm{BU}} \newcommand{\SU}{\mathrm{SU}}
\newcommand{\MU}{\mathrm{MU}} \newcommand{\ul}[1]{\underline #1}
\newcommand{\Sq}{\mathrm{Sq}} \newcommand{\Tr}{\mathrm{Tr}}
\newcommand{\d}{\mathrm{d}} \newcommand{\HP}{\mathbf{H}P}
\newcommand{\cL}{\mathcal{L}} \newcommand{\cs}{\mathrm{cs}}
\newcommand{\cd}{\mathcal{D}} \newcommand{\Bord}{\mathrm{Bord}}
\newcommand{\SO}{\mathrm{SO}} \newcommand{\cC}{\mathcal{C}}
\newcommand{\Sp}{\mathrm{Sp}} \newcommand{\Lkd}{L_{K(d)}}
\newcommand{\Mod}{\mathrm{Mod}}$$

Summer's begun (finally!). I want to try to explain some concepts in topological
QFT which I've been reading about. This past semester, I took MIT's 8.06
(quantum physics III), for which we had to write a final paper on a topic of our
choosing. I [wrote about](http://www.mit.edu/~sanathd/final-paper.pdf) anyons,
which are particles with fractional statistics --- they only exist in two
spatial dimensions, thanks to the nontriviality of the fundamental group of the
configuration space of points in the plane (equivalently, thanks to the
triviality of the angular momentum commutation relations in two dimensions). In
my writeup, I discussed how one can construct anyonic particles from a conserved
charged matter current and a gauge field by adding a *Chern-Simons* term to the
Lagrangian; the Euler-Lagrange equation which this additional term contributes
to forces the magnetic field (associated to the gauge field) and the charge to
be related, and the Aharonov-Bohm effect then forces the resulting physics to be
that of an anyon.

The term that's added to the Lagrangian is the "Chern-Simons term"

$$\cL_\cs = \gamma \epsilon^{\mu\nu\rho} A_\mu \partial_\nu A_\rho + A_\mu
j^\mu,$$

where $$j^\mu$$ is the conserved current and $$A_\mu$$ is the gauge field. The
pure Chern-Simons action is

$$S = \int_M \epsilon^{\mu\nu\rho} A_\mu \partial_\nu A_\rho \ \d^3 x,$$

where $$M$$ is the background $$(2+1)$$-dimensional (closed, oriented) manifold.
This action is special: it does not depend on the metric at all --- the
Chern-Simons theory is purely topological. The associated quantum field theory,
with path integral/partition function $$\int e^{iS[A]} \cd[A]$$ only depends on
the topology of the manifold. As such, Chern-Simons theory should be accessible
through topology.

The Chern-Simons Lagrangian can be rephrased more mathematically as follows. Let
$$G = \SU(n)$$, and let $$A$$ be a connection on the trivial $$G$$-bundle over
the $$3$$-dimensional spacetime $$M$$ (all we need right now is that $$M$$ be
closed and oriented), so $$A\in \Omega^1(M;\mathfrak{g})$$. The Lagrangian is
then $$\mathrm{Trace}(A\wedge \d A)$$; this is a $$3$$-form on $$M$$. The action
is the integral of this $$3$$-form; if we think of this $$3$$-form as a singular
cochain, then the integral is just the evaluation of this cochain (or rather,
its image in cohomology) on the fundamental class of $$M$$ (recall, we assumed
$$M$$ oriented).

Setting it up in this level of generality provides us a path to follow. Let's
(obviously) work with general $$n$$-dimensional closed oriented manifolds.
Replace $$\SU(n)$$ with a finite group $$G$$ (then the Lie algebra
$$\mathfrak{g}$$ is trivial, but that's OK). Instead of the Chern-Simons
Lagrangian, we'd like to have a top-dimensional cohomology class defined on all
closed connected $$n$$-manifolds ("spacetimes"), so that the action is the
pairing of this class with the fundamental class. The natural choice for this
class is a choice of cohomology class $$\alpha\in \H^{n+1}(BG;\Z) \cong
\H^n(BG;\QQ/\Z)$$; every $$G$$-bundle $$P$$ with connection on $$M$$ determines
an element of $$\H^n(M;\QQ/\Z)$$, hence $$\QQ/\Z$$ (by integration). This should
be thought of as the exponentiated action of the field $$P$$. 

In order to define the path integral, we need to define a measure on the
collection of $$G$$-bundles on $$M$$. As is ubiquitous in math, we weight the
term associated to $$P$$ by $$|\Aut(P)|$$. Concretely, the exponentiated action
is $$\langle [M], \alpha(P)\rangle$$, and the associated path integral is

$$Z(M) = \sum_{P\in [M, BG]} \frac{1}{|\Aut(P)|} \langle [M],
\alpha(P)\rangle.$$

This is the $$\sigma$$-model known as Dijkgraaf-Witten theory; it's a prototype
for the general Chern-Simons theory. It's a rather accessible topological
quantum field theory.  In an $$n$$-dimensional TQFT, one assigns a number to a
closed oriented $$n$$-manifold, a complex vector space to a closed oriented
$$(n-1)$$-manifold, and a linear transformation to a cobordism between
$$(n-1)$$-manifolds; what is the associated vector space in the case of
Dijkgraaf-Witten theory?

Let $$N$$ be an oriented $$(n-1)$$-manifold. There is a map $$N\times \Map(N,
BG) \to BG$$, which defines a class in $$\H^n(N\times \Map(N, BG);\QQ/\Z)$$. We
can push this cohomology class along the projection map $$N\times \Map(N, BG)
\to N$$; this defines an element of $$\H^1(\Map(N,BG);\QQ/\Z)$$, and hence an
element of $$\H^1(\Map(N,BG);\cc^\times)$$. Associated to this class is a line
bundle $$\cL_N$$ over $$\Map(N,BG)$$, and $$Z(N)$$ is defined to be the
$$\cc$$-vector space of global sections of $$\cL_N$$.

If $$M$$ and $$N$$ are closed oriented $$(n-1)$$-manifolds, and $$B$$ is an
oriented bordism from $$M$$ to $$N$$, we need an associated linear
transformation $$Z(B):\H^0(\Map(M,BG),\cL_M) \to \H^0(\Map(N,BG),\cL_N)$$. There
are maps $$\pi_M,\pi_N: \Map(B,BG) \to \Map(M,BG), \Map(N,BG)$$, so we get a map
$$\H^0(\Map(M,BG),\cL_M) \to \H^0(\Map(B,BG),\pi_M^\ast \cL_M)$$ --- however,
there is no obvious map

$$\H^0(\Map(B,BG),\pi_M^\ast \cL_M) \cong \H^0(\Map(B,BG),\pi_N^\ast \cL_N)\to
\H^0(\Map(N,BG),\cL_N).$$

We are saved, though: there are canonical isomorphisms

$$\H^0(\Map(N,BG),\cL_N) \cong \H_0(\Map(N,BG),\cL_N), \mathrm{and} \ \H^0(\Map(B,BG),\pi_N^\ast \cL_N) \cong \H_0(\Map(B,BG),\pi_N^\ast \cL_N).$$

The covariant functoriality of homology now does the trick.

At some point, it was realized that extending $$n$$-dimensional TQFTs to
prescribe algebraic invariants to manifolds of lower dimensions ($$n-2, n-3$$,
etc.) was a mathematically useful thing to do. An extended $$n$$-dimensional
TQFT is then defined as a symmetric monoidal functor $$\Bord^\SO_n \to \cC$$,
where $$\Bord^\SO_n$$ is the $$(\infty,n)$$-category of oriented points,
oriented bordisms of oriented points, oriented bordisms between these
$$1$$-morphisms, etc., and $$\cC$$ is a symmetric monoidal
$$(\infty,n)$$-category. The utility of this definition comes from the cobordism
hypothesis: extended $$n$$-dimensional TQFTs with values in $$\cC$$ are the same
as fully dualizable objects of $$\cC$$.

In the case of $$n$$-dimensional Chern-Simons theory, we described above what
one might attach to an $$(n-1)$$-manifold (the $$(n-1)$$-morphisms in
$$\Bord^\SO_n$$) and a $$n$$-manifold (the $$n$$-morphisms in $$\Bord^\SO_n$$).
What does one attach to manifolds of lower dimensions? Let's specialize to the
case when $$n=2$$. In this case, we're asking what one might assign to
(oriented) points. To begin with, we need to make a choice of $$\cC$$: it will
be the $$(\infty,2)$$-category of algebras, bimodules, and morphisms of
bimodules. The classification of (extended) $$2$$-dimensional TQFTs via the
cobordism hypothesis says that an extended $$2$$-dimensional TQFT is determined
by a Frobenius algebra (i.e., a finite-dimensional $$\cc$$-algebra equipped with
a nondegenerate trace). Therefore, $$2 = (1+1)$$-dimensional Dijkgraaf-Witten
theory must be determined by such a Frobenius algebra. Choose a cocycle
representative, also denoted $$\alpha$$, for our cohomology class $$\alpha$$ ---
note that this isn't a crazy thing to ask for, since the $$3$$-dimensional
Chern-Simons action explicitly used a $$3$$-form, and not just a $$3$$-cocycle
--- and let $$A$$ be the twisted group ring $$\cc^\alpha[G]$$. The underlying
complex vector space is the same as the usual group ring $$\cc[G]$$, but the
multiplication is twisted by $$\alpha$$: 

$$\left(\sum_{g\in G} a_g g\right) \left(\sum_{h\in G} b_h h\right) =
\sum_{k\in G} \left(\sum_{gh=k} \alpha(gh) a_g b_h\right) k.$$

This twisted group algebra $$\cc^\alpha[G]$$ has a canonical trace, and hence
admits the structure of a Frobenius algebra; the associated $$2$$-dimensional
TQFT is Dijkgraaf-Witten theory. Of course, one can run the same story for
extended $$3$$-dimensional Dijkgraaf-Witten theory; for an appropriate choice of
target $$(\infty,3)$$-category, one finds that the associated extended
$$3$$-dimensional TQFT is determined by a twisted group algebra with
coefficients in the category of complex vector spaces.

Let's go back to our definition of the partition function $$Z(M)$$ on a closed
oriented $$n$$-manifold $$M$$. Associated to a principal $$G$$-bundle $$P$$ on
$$M$$ was the classical (exponentiated) action, defined as the integral of the
characteristic class $$\alpha(P)$$. The quantization of this theory was defined
as a weighted sum over isomorphism classes of principal $$G$$-bundles of this
action. Consider the (for simplicity, $$1$$-)category $$\Bord^\SO_n(G)$$ of
closed oriented $$1$$-manifolds with a $$G$$-bundle and compact oriented
$$2$$-manifolds with a $$G$$-bundle; then the classical action defines a
symmetric monoidal functor $$\Bord^\SO_n(G) \to \mathrm{Vect}_\cc$$, sending an
$$(n-1)$$-manifold $$N$$ and a principal $$G$$-bundle $$P$$ to the
$$\cc$$-vector space given by the fiber $$(\cL_N)_P$$ of the bundle $$\cL_N$$
over $$P\in \pi_0\Map(N,BG)$$. The quantization of this classical theory can be
thought of as a sort of right Kan extension of the functor $$\Bord^\SO_n(G) \to
\mathrm{Vect}_\cc$$ along the forgetful functor $$\Bord^\SO_n(G) \to
\Bord^\SO_n$$ (where the target is now the $$1$$-category obtained by truncating
the $$(\infty,n)$$-category of bordisms).

We can adopt a slightly different viewpoint of this quantization procedure in
the following manner: rather than assigning a number (the action) to each field
(principal $$G$$-bundle) on a manifold (spacetime), we can assign to each
spacetime the *space* of all fields, and sum the action over this space with
respect to a particular measure. A little more precisely, let $$B$$ be an
$$((n-1)+1)$$-dimensional spacetime, and let $$\cf(B)$$ be the space of fields
on $$B$$ (in the Dijkgraaf-Witten story, this was $$\Map(B,BG)$$). Let $$M$$ and
$$N$$ be spacelike slices of $$B$$, so $$B$$ is an oriented bordism between
$$M$$ and $$N$$. There are spaces (groupoids, really) $$\cf(M)$$ and $$\cf(N)$$
of fields on $$M$$ and $$N$$, but on which there is no classical action; there
are also maps $$\cf(B) \to \cf(M), \cf(N)$$. We may view $$\cf$$ as defining a
functor from $$\Bord^\SO_n$$ to the category of correspondences of groupoids. In
the Dijkgraaf-Witten theory, $$\cf(M)$$ had more structure: it was equipped with
a local system $$\cL_M$$ of complex vector spaces (such that the global sections
of $$\cL_M$$ was the space of states on $$M$$), i.e., a functor $$\cf(M) \to
\mathrm{Vect}_\cc$$.

A [natural generalization](https://arxiv.org/pdf/0905.0731.pdf), therefore, is
to generalize the ($$(\infty,n)$$-, really) category of correspondences of
groupoids to the $$(\infty,n)$$-category $$\mathrm{Fam}_n(\cC)$$ of groupoids
equipped a functor to the target $$(\infty,n)$$-category $$\cC$$ --- or, more
generally, some data of "$$\cC$$-local systems on $$X$$". A classical theory is
a symmetric monoidal functor $$\cf:\Bord^\SO_n\to \mathrm{Fam}_n(\cC)$$. What,
then, is the quantization of this theory?  It is an extension of the functor
$$\Bord^\SO_n\to \mathrm{Fam}_n(\cC)$$ to a functor $$\Bord^\SO_n \to \cC$$, via
the functor $$\mathrm{Fam}_n(\cC) \to \cC$$ sending a groupoid $$X$$ and a
functor $$\cL_X:X\to \cC$$ to the limit $$\lim_X \cL_X$$ (so $$\cC$$ must admit
limits; let's also assume that it admits colimits). It's not clear that this
assignment even defines a functor $$\mathrm{Fam}_n(\cC) \to \cC$$, for the same
reason as in the Dijkgraaf-Witten situation: the limit $$\lim_X \cL_X$$ is the
cohomology of $$\cL_X$$ over $$X$$, but cohomology is contravariant. In this
Dijkgraaf-Witten case, this was resolved by noting that there was an isomorphism
between homology and cohomology --- we need a similar coincidence to take place
in $$\cC$$. (See [this paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1003.5603.pdf) for a proof
that the construction sketched out above in fact agrees with Dijkgraaf-Witten
theory.)

More precisely, suppose that $$B$$ is a bordism between $$M$$ and $$N$$; then,
there is a map $$\lim_{\cf(M)} \cL_M \to \lim_{\cf(B)} \cL_B$$. Let $$f:\cf(B)
\to \cf(N)$$ be the map induced from the bordism; what we are seeking is a map
$$\lim_{\cf(B)} \cL_B = \lim_{\cf(B)} f^\ast \cL_N \to \lim_{\cf(N)} \cL_N$$.
Suppose that the map $$f$$ is $$\cC$$-ambidextrous; what this means is that the
left and right Kan extensions $$f_!,f_\ast:\mathrm{Fun}(\cf(B), \cC) \to
\mathrm{Fun}(\cf(N), \cC)$$ (respectively) are equivalent via the norm map. If
$$p:\cf(N) \to \ast$$ is the terminal map, then $$p_\ast$$ (resp. $$p_\ast
f_\ast$$) is the global sections (i.e., "take the limit") functor on
$$\mathrm{Fun}(\cf(N), \cC)$$ (resp. $$\mathrm{Fun}(\cf(B), \cC)$$). In
particular, the map we'd want would be automatic from the existence of a map
$$f_\ast \cL_B \to \cL_N$$ of $$\cC$$-valued local systems on $$\cf(N)$$. By
$$\cC$$-ambidexterity,

$$f_\ast \cL_B \cong f_! \cL_B \cong f_! f^\ast \cL_N;$$

we therefore obtain a canonical map $$f_! f^\ast \cL_N \to \cL_N$$, since
$$f_!$$ is left adjoint to $$f^\ast$$. In order to obtain an interesting TQFT,
we should therefore: choose a nice symmetric monoidal $$(\infty,n)$$-category
admitting limits by groupoids, and define a classical theory $$\cf:\Bord^\SO_n
\to \mathrm{Fam}_n(\cC)$$ such that bordisms induce $$\cC$$-ambidextrous
morphisms of groupoids. Phrased another way to place emphasis more on the
category $$\cC$$ than on the morphisms, one would like a functor/classical
theory $$\cf$$ and an $$(\infty,n)$$-category $$\cC$$ for which every morphism
of $$\pi$$-finite groupoids is $$\cC$$-ambidextrous. (If we're generalizing
anyway, I don't see why we should restrict to the category
$$\mathrm{Fam}_n(\cC)$$ of *groupoids* and $$\cC$$-local systems on them;
perhaps physical considerations suggest looking at a category of
$$(\infty,d)$$-categories for $$d < n$$ and $$\cC$$-local systems on them, i.e.,
assigning to a manifold an $$(\infty,d)$$-category of "fields".)

This is where the ambidexterity results of Hopkins and Lurie comes into play.
Let $$\cC = \Lkd \Sp$$ denote the $$(\infty,n=1)$$-category of $$K(d)$$-local
spectra. Then Hopkins-Lurie prove that every map $$f:X\to Y$$ of $$\pi$$-finite
spaces (i.e., spaces with finitely many homotopy groups, each of which are
finite) is $$\cC$$-ambidextrous. It follows that if $$\cf:\Bord^\SO_n \to
\mathrm{Fam}_1(\Lkd \Sp)$$ is a classical theory taking values in $$\pi$$-finite
spaces/groupoids, then there is an associated TQFT taking values in $$\Lkd
\Sp$$. We can either view this as a (boring) $$1$$-dimensional TQFT, or as a
non-extended $$n$$-dimensional TQFT for any $$n$$. Note that this TQFT is
determined by a fully dualizable (i.e., dualizable) object in $$\Lkd \Sp$$, aka
a spectrum whose $$K(d)$$-homology is finite-dimensional over $$K(d)_\ast$$. 

One can further generalize this story: let $$A$$ be an $$\Eoo$$-ring, and let
$$\GG$$ be an oriented $$p$$-divisible group over $$A$$ (for a fixed prime
$$p$$). Let $$\cC$$ be the $$\infty$$-category of $$A$$-modules. For every space
$$X$$, one can associate an $$\infty$$-category $$\mathrm{LocSys}_\GG(X)$$ of
$$\GG$$-tempered local systems (these should be thought of as "twisted" local
systems of $$A$$-modules on $$X$$). Lurie proves in [Elliptic
III](http://www.math.harvard.edu/~lurie/papers/Elliptic-III-Tempered.pdf) that
if $$f:X\to Y$$ is a map of $$p$$-finite spaces (i.e., $$\pi$$-finite with all
homotopy groups assumed to be finite abelian $$p$$-groups), then the functors
$$f_!, f_\ast: \mathrm{LocSys}_\GG(X)\to \mathrm{LocSys}_\GG(Y)$$ are equivalent
via the norm map. In other words, if $$\cf:\Bord^\SO_n \to
\mathrm{Fam}_1(\Mod(A))$$ is a classical theory taking values in $$p$$-finite
spaces/groupoids, where $$\Bord^\SO_n$$ is the ordinary $$1$$-category of
cobordisms, then there is an associated TQFT taking values in $$\Mod(A)$$.  As
before, this TQFT is determined by a fully dualizable (i.e., dualizable) object
in $$\Mod(A)$$.

How can we construct a functor $$\Bord^\SO_n\to \mathrm{Fam}_1(\Mod(A))$$? One
way to do so is to generalize the Dijkgraaf-Witten story. Namely, choose a
$$\pi$$-finite space $$X$$, and send $$M$$ to the $$\pi$$-finite space $$\Map(M,
X)$$. Of course, we need to define a functor $$\Map(M, X)\to \Mod(A)$$ for every
$$(n-1)$$-manifold $$M$$. In order to do this, we run a construction similar to
the classical (untwisted) situation: simply choose an $$A$$-module $$\cL$$, and
let the local system over $$\Map(M,X)$$ be the constant one.

If we choose $$A = \H\cc$$, then the value of the resulting TQFT on a closed
$$n$$-manifold $$M$$ (i.e., the partition function of $$M$$) is

$$Z(M) = \sum_{x\in \pi_0\Map(M,X)} \prod_{k\geq 1} |\pi_k(\Map(M,X),
x)|^{(-1)^k}\in \QQ_{\geq 0}.$$

This is alternatively the homotopy cardinality of $$\Map(M,X)$$.

It'd be very interesting to find $$(\infty,n)$$-categories for which similar
ambidexterity results hold, consequently generalizing Dijkgraaf-Witten theory.
I'd also like to know whether physical considerations lead to conjectural target
$$(\infty,n)$$-categories.
