---
layout: post
title:  "Hawking radiation"
date:   2019-03-29
categories: physics
---

<script type="text/javascript" async=""
src="https://www.google-analytics.com/analytics.js"></script>
<script async=""
src="https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtag/js?id=UA-109004213-1"></script>
<script>
  window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || [];
    function gtag(){dataLayer.push(arguments);}
      gtag('js', new Date());

        gtag('config', 'UA-109004213-1');
</script>
<script type="text/javascript"
src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML">
</script>

$$\newcommand{\KO}{\mathrm{KO}} \newcommand{\TMF}{\mathrm{TMF}}
\newcommand{\KU}{\mathrm{KU}} \newcommand{\Mfg}{M_\mathrm{fg}}
\newcommand{\spec}{\mathrm{Spec}\ } \newcommand{\dX}{\mathcal{X}}
\newcommand{\co}{\mathcal{O}} \newcommand{\Z}{\mathbf{Z}}
\newcommand{\top}{\mathrm{top}} \newcommand{\E}{\mathbf{E}}
\newcommand{\GG}{\mathbf{G}} \newcommand{\DD}{\mathbf{D}}
\newcommand{\Mell}{M_\mathrm{ell}} \newcommand{\ce}{\mathcal{E}}
\newcommand{\H}{\mathrm{H}} \newcommand{\dR}{\mathrm{dR}}
\newcommand{\cf}{\mathcal{F}} \newcommand{\FF}{\mathbf{F}}
\newcommand{\spf}{\mathrm{Spf}\ } \newcommand{\cA}{\mathcal{A}}
\newcommand{\Mcub}{M_\mathrm{cub}} \newcommand{\Mqd}{M_\mathrm{qd}}
\newcommand{\Aut}{\mathrm{Aut}} \newcommand{\tmf}{\mathrm{tmf}}
\newcommand{\Tmf}{\mathrm{Tmf}} \newcommand{\Map}{\mathrm{Map}}
\newcommand{\Ext}{\mathrm{Ext}} \newcommand{\End}{\mathrm{End}}
\newcommand{\cg}{\mathcal{G}} \newcommand{\Hom}{\mathrm{Hom}}
\newcommand{BP}[1]{\mathrm{BP}\langle #1\rangle} \newcommand{\QQ}{\mathbf{Q}}
\newcommand{\PP}{\mathbf{P}} \newcommand{\Gal}{\mathrm{Gal}}
\newcommand{\proj}{\mathrm{Proj}\ } \newcommand{\Ltwo}{L_{K(2)}}
\newcommand{\Eoo}{\mathbf{E}_\infty} \newcommand{\ol}[1]{\overline #1}
\newcommand{\pic}{\mathrm{Pic}} \newcommand{\RP}{\mathbf{R}P}
\newcommand{\BO}{\mathrm{BO}} \newcommand{\cc}{\mathbf{C}}
\newcommand{\CP}{\mathbf{C}P} \newcommand{\wt}[1]{\widetilde #1}
\newcommand{\RR}{\mathbf{R}} \renewcommand{\S}{\mathbb{S}}
\newcommand{\Lone}{L_{K(1)}} \newcommand{\Ltwo}{L_{K(2)}}
\newcommand{\gl}{\mathrm{gl}} \newcommand{\Lk}{L_{K(n)}}
\newcommand{\ku}{\mathrm{ku}} \newcommand{\ko}{\mathrm{ko}}
\newcommand{\GL}{\mathrm{GL}} \newcommand{\Ln}{L_n}
\newcommand{\Lt}{L_{K(t)}} \newcommand{\W}{\mathrm{W}}
\newcommand{\BU}{\mathrm{BU}} \newcommand{\SU}{\mathrm{SU}}
\newcommand{\MU}{\mathrm{MU}} \newcommand{\ul}[1]{\underline #1}
\newcommand{\Sq}{\mathrm{Sq}} \newcommand{\Tr}{\mathrm{Tr}}
\newcommand{\d}{\mathrm{d}}$$

I took a course on general relativity last year, and since then, I've
maintained a casual interest in black holes. They seem like a good test ground
for a lot of theoretical concepts. In this (mostly expository) post, I want to
describe a few foundational results in this area.

Let $$H$$ be the Hamiltonian of a quantum theory. Recall from elementary
statistical physics that the Boltzmann distribution says that a state with
energy $$E$$ is assigned a probability proportional to $$e^{-E/k_B T} =
e^{-\beta E}$$, where $$T$$ is the temperature. Let $$\co$$ be an operator;
then the expectation value of $$\co$$ is $$\langle \co\rangle = \Tr(e^{-\beta
H} \co)/\Tr(e^{-\beta H})$$. Recall that $$\Tr(e^{-\beta H}) =: Z(T)$$ is the
partition function of the theory. In the Heisenberg picture, the operator
$$\co$$ evolves via $$\co(t) = e^{iHt} \co e^{-iHt}$$. Let's perform a Wick
rotation, sending $$t \to -i\tau$$; then it is easy to see that $$\co(-i\tau)$$
is periodic with period $$\beta$$. 

Suppose we now study a quantum theory on Schwarzschild spacetime. Since
expectation values of operators should be analytic functions of coordinates,
they should be well-defined on the Euclidean-signature spacetime obtained by
Wick rotation. As we saw above, this forces all operators to be periodic with
period $$\beta$$; so the Schwarzschild black hole in equilibrium must be
surrounded by a temperature bath of temperature determined by $$\beta$$. If
there's nothing else around the black hole, then it must be emitting radiation
at that temperature.

Can we obtain this periodicity in terms of the parameters determining the
Schwarzschild black hole? Recall that the Schwarzschild metric is

$$\d s^2 = -\left(1 - \frac{2GM}{r}\right) \d t^2 + \left(1 -
\frac{2GM}{r}\right)^{-1} \d r^2 + r^2 \d \Omega^2,$$

where $$\d\Omega^2 = \d\theta^2 + \sin^2(\phi) \d\phi^2$$ is the metric of a
$$2$$-sphere. Upon Wick rotation, this metric becomes

$$\d s^2 = \left(1 - \frac{2GM}{r}\right) \d\tau^2 + \left(1 -
\frac{2GM}{r}\right)^{-1} \d r^2 + r^2 \d \Omega^2.$$

As is customary, we now set $$G = 1$$. Define $$R = 4M\left(1 -
\frac{2M}{r}\right)^{1/2}$$. Then

$$\d R = \frac{4M^2}{r^2} \left(1 - \frac{2M}{r}\right)^{-1/2} \d r.$$

It follows that, upon Wick rotation, we can rewrite the metric as

$$\d s^2 = {R}^2 \d\left(\frac{\tau}{4M}\right)^2 +
\left(\frac{r^2}{4M^2}\right)^2 \d {R}^2 + r^2 d\Omega^2.$$

The Schwarzschild coordinate system has a singularity near the event horizon at
radius $$2M$$, so let's approximate $$r$$ to be near $$2M$$; then $$r^2/4M^2
\approx 1$$. This gives

$$\d s^2 = \d R^2 + R^2 \left(\d \left(\frac{\tau}{4M}\right)^2 +
\frac{r^2}{R^2} d\Omega^2\right).$$

This metric is of the form $$\d R^2 + R^2 \d\Gamma^2$$ (where we define
$$\Gamma$$ by identifying $$\d\Gamma^2$$ with the parenthetical expression).
At $$R = 0$$, this metric is conically singular, unless $$\Gamma$$ is periodic
with period $$2\pi$$. If we require that no such conical singularity is
present, then this forces $$\tau$$ to be periodic of period $$2\pi\cdot 4M =
8\pi M$$. We know, however, that the periodicity is $$\beta = 1/T$$ (setting
$$k_B = 1$$); therefore, we find that $$T = \frac{1}{8\pi M}$$. This is the
expression for Hawking temperature of a Schwarzschild black hole. Let me
mention that there are lots of derivations of the Hawking temperature. One such
derivation, which I like a lot because it's quite intuitive (it uses the
classical WKB approximation to calculate the probability of a particle
tunnelling through the horizon), is from [this
paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/hep-th/9907001.pdf). 

Using the Hawking temperature, we can also figure out an expression for the
lifetime of a black hole. If we approximate the black hole as radiating like a
blackbody radiator, then the Stefan-Boltzmann law states that

$$\frac{\d M}{\d t} = -e \sigma T^4 A,$$

where $$e$$ is the emissivity (some constant), $$A$$ is the area, and
$$\sigma$$ is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant. We know that $$T = 1/8\pi M$$ and
$$A = 4\pi R^2 = 16\pi M^2$$; solving this easy differential equation shows
the lifetime goes as $$O(M^3)$$.

The Hawking temperature also gives an expression for the entropy. The entropy
of a photon gas is determined by $$S = 4U/3T$$, where $$U$$ is the internal
energy. Therefore, $$\d S = 4\d U/3T$$. By conservation of energy, $$\d U =
-\d M$$. Let $$\epsilon$$ denote the energy scale at which semi-classical
approximations no longer work; then, by approximating the emitted Hawking
radiation as a photon gas, we find that the entropy of emitted Hawking
radiation is

$$S = -\int^\epsilon_M \frac{4}{3} \frac{\d M'}{T} = -\int^\epsilon_M \frac{32
\pi M'}{3} \d M' = -\frac{16\pi M^2}{3} + O(\epsilon)^2.$$

Let's ignore $$\epsilon$$ (reasonable since $$\epsilon \ll M$$). We now need to
understand how the entropy $$S'$$ of a system which loses internal energy only
through blackbody radiation relates to the entropy $$S$$ of its emitted
radiation, if the latter is regarded as a photon gas, and the whole system is
at equilibrium. The temperatures of both systems will agree at equilibrium;
let's denote this temperature by $$T$$. We know that $$\d U' = T \d S'$$ and
$$\d U = 3T\d S/4$$; therefore, we find by conservation of energy that $$\d S'
= -3\d S/4$$. Integrating, we find that $$S' = -3S/4$$. In particular, in our
case, we find that the entropy of the black hole is $$\frac{3}{4} \frac{16\pi
M^2}{3} = \frac{4\pi (2M)^2}{4} = \frac{A}{4}$$, where $$A = 4\pi (2M)^2$$.
This is the expression for the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy.

What can we do with this? Here's an amusing back-of-the-envelope calculation.
Recall that a Schwarzschild black hole is entirely determined by its mass
$$M$$. This means that the Schwarzschild radius ($$R = 2M$$), the area ($$A =
4\pi R^2$$), and the wavelength $$\lambda = \hbar/Mc$$ are equivalent data. As
usual, we set $$\hbar=c=1$$. Then $$R\lambda = 2$$.  It's not unreasonable to
expect a black hole to behave like a wave with wavelength $$\lambda = 1/M$$.
It's natural to expect that the black hole is stable if the associated wave is
a standing wave, i.e., that the circumference (which is $$2\pi R$$) is an
integral multiple of the wavelength $$\lambda$$. In other words, $$2\pi R =
n\lambda$$. On a spherical surface, the number of nodes $$n$$ is even, and thus
$$\pi R = 2\ell\lambda$$ for some integer $$\ell$$.  Using $$R\lambda = 2$$,
this defines a quantization condition on the radius: $$R_\ell =
2\sqrt{\ell/\pi}$$. The surface area of the black hole is therefore also
quantized ($$A_\ell = 16\ell$$), as is the entropy ($$S_\ell = 4\ell$$) and the
temperature ($$T_\ell = \frac{1}{8\sqrt{\ell\pi}}$$). This is, of course, a
very imprecise derivation of a very interesting conclusion; I wonder if these
sorts of arguments have been made precise.
