---
layout: post
title:  "Brauer-Wall spaces and algebraic K-theory"
date:   2020-02-03
categories: algebraic-topology
---

<script type="text/javascript" async=""
src="https://www.google-analytics.com/analytics.js"></script>
<script async=""
src="https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtag/js?id=UA-109004213-1"></script>
<script>
  window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || [];
    function gtag(){dataLayer.push(arguments);}
      gtag('js', new Date());

        gtag('config', 'UA-109004213-1');
</script>
<script type="text/javascript"
src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML">
</script>

$$\newcommand{\KO}{\mathrm{KO}} \newcommand{\TMF}{\mathrm{TMF}}
\newcommand{\KU}{\mathrm{KU}} \newcommand{\Mfg}{M_\mathrm{fg}}
\newcommand{\spec}{\mathrm{Spec}\ } \newcommand{\dX}{\mathcal{X}}
\newcommand{\co}{\mathcal{O}} \newcommand{\Z}{\mathbf{Z}}
\newcommand{\top}{\mathrm{top}} \newcommand{\E}{\mathbf{E}}
\newcommand{\GG}{\mathbf{G}} \newcommand{\DD}{\mathbf{D}}
\newcommand{\Mell}{M_\mathrm{ell}} \newcommand{\ce}{\mathcal{E}}
\newcommand{\H}{\mathrm{H}} \newcommand{\dR}{\mathrm{dR}}
\newcommand{\cf}{\mathcal{F}} \newcommand{\FF}{\mathbf{F}}
\newcommand{\spf}{\mathrm{Spf}\ } \newcommand{\cA}{\mathcal{A}}
\newcommand{\Mcub}{M_\mathrm{cub}} \newcommand{\Mqd}{M_\mathrm{qd}}
\newcommand{\Aut}{\mathrm{Aut}} \newcommand{\tmf}{\mathrm{tmf}}
\newcommand{\Tmf}{\mathrm{Tmf}} \newcommand{\Map}{\mathrm{Map}}
\newcommand{\Ext}{\mathrm{Ext}} \newcommand{\End}{\mathrm{End}}
\newcommand{\cg}{\mathcal{G}} \newcommand{\Hom}{\mathrm{Hom}}
\newcommand{BP}[1]{\mathrm{BP}\langle #1\rangle} \newcommand{\QQ}{\mathbf{Q}}
\newcommand{\PP}{\mathbf{P}} \newcommand{\Gal}{\mathrm{Gal}}
\newcommand{\proj}{\mathrm{Proj}\ } \newcommand{\Ltwo}{L_{K(2)}}
\newcommand{\Eoo}{\mathbf{E}_\infty} \newcommand{\ol}[1]{\overline #1}
\newcommand{\pic}{\mathrm{Pic}} \newcommand{\RP}{\mathbf{R}P}
\newcommand{\BO}{\mathrm{BO}} \newcommand{\cc}{\mathbf{C}}
\newcommand{\CP}{\mathbf{C}P} \newcommand{\wt}[1]{\widetilde #1}
\newcommand{\RR}{\mathbf{R}} \renewcommand{\S}{\mathbb{S}}
\newcommand{\Lone}{L_{K(1)}} \newcommand{\Ltwo}{L_{K(2)}}
\newcommand{\gl}{\mathrm{gl}} \newcommand{\Lk}{L_{K(n)}}
\newcommand{\ku}{\mathrm{ku}} \newcommand{\ko}{\mathrm{ko}}
\newcommand{\GL}{\mathrm{GL}} \newcommand{\Ln}{L_n} \newcommand{\Lt}{L_{K(t)}}
\newcommand{\W}{\mathrm{W}} \newcommand{\BU}{\mathrm{BU}}
\newcommand{\SU}{\mathrm{SU}} \newcommand{\MU}{\mathrm{MU}}
\newcommand{\ul}[1]{\underline #1} \newcommand{\Sq}{\mathrm{Sq}}
\newcommand{\Tr}{\mathrm{Tr}} \newcommand{\d}{\mathrm{d}}
\newcommand{\HP}{\mathbf{H}P} \newcommand{\cL}{\mathcal{L}}
\newcommand{\cs}{\mathrm{cs}} \newcommand{\cd}{\mathcal{D}}
\newcommand{\Bord}{\mathrm{Bord}} \newcommand{\SO}{\mathrm{SO}}
\newcommand{\cC}{\mathcal{C}} \newcommand{\Sp}{\mathrm{Sp}}
\newcommand{\Lkd}{L_{K(d)}} \newcommand{\Mod}{\mathrm{Mod}}
\newcommand{\cH}{\mathcal{H}} \newcommand{\ket}[1]{|#1 \rangle}
\newcommand{\Bun}{\mathrm{Bun}} \newcommand{\cM}{\mathcal{M}}
\newcommand{\MTH}{\mathrm{MT}H} \newcommand{\MSO}{\mathrm{MSO}}
\newcommand{\twsm}{\ \widetilde{\wedge} \ } \newcommand{\BSpin}{\mathrm{BSpin}}
\newcommand{\MSpin}{\mathrm{MSpin}} \newcommand{\BString}{\mathrm{BString}}
\newcommand{\MString}{\mathrm{MString}} \newcommand{\B}{\mathrm{B}}
\newcommand{\der}{\mathrm{der}} \newcommand{\Cat}{\mathrm{Cat}}
\newcommand{\QCoh}{\mathrm{QCoh}} \newcommand{\LMod}{\mathrm{LMod}}
\newcommand{\Rep}{\mathrm{Rep}} \newcommand{\HH}{\mathrm{HH}}
\newcommand{\ZZ}{\mathfrak{Z}} \newcommand{\fr}{\mathrm{fr}}
\newcommand{\BSO}{\mathrm{BSO}} \newcommand{\BSU}{\mathrm{BSU}}
\newcommand{\id}{\mathrm{id}} \newcommand{\Top}{\mathrm{Top}}
\newcommand{\cP}{\mathcal{P}} \newcommand{\U}{\mathrm{U}}
\newcommand{\Sym}{\mathrm{Sym}} \newcommand{\coker}{\mathrm{coker}}
\newcommand{\Vect}{\mathrm{Vect}} \newcommand{\Fun}{\mathrm{Fun}}
\newcommand{\cT}{\mathcal{T}} \newcommand{\cJ}{\mathcal{J}}
\newcommand{\Res}{\mathrm{Res}} \newcommand{\Ind}{\mathrm{Ind}}
\newcommand{\MO}{\mathrm{MO}} \newcommand{\MSO}{\mathrm{MSO}}
\newcommand{\colim}{\mathrm{colim}} \newcommand{\hocolim}{\mathrm{hocolim}}
\newcommand{\fin}{\mathrm{fin}} \newcommand{\Tot}{\mathrm{Tot}}
\newcommand{\im}{\mathrm{im}} \newcommand{\FT}{\mathrm{FT}}
\newcommand{\AA}{\mathbf{A}} \newcommand{\Frob}{\mathrm{Frob}}
\newcommand{\ex}{\mathrm{ex,pr}} \newcommand{\fil}{\mathrm{fil}}
\newcommand{\gr}{\mathrm{gr}} \newcommand{\un}{\mathrm{un}}
\newcommand{\Syn}{\mathrm{Syn}} \newcommand{\Cart}{\mathrm{Cart}}
\newcommand{\bo}{\mathrm{bo}} \newcommand{\mmod}{/\!\!/}
\newcommand{\bsp}{\mathrm{bsp}} \newcommand{\BPP}{\mathrm{BP}}
\newcommand{\CAlg}{\mathrm{CAlg}} \newcommand{\TCart}{\mathrm{TCart}}
\newcommand{\BW}{\mathrm{BW}} \newcommand{\Br}{\mathrm{Br}}
\newcommand{\Pic}{\mathrm{Pic}} \newcommand{\ext}{\mathrm{ext}}
\newcommand{\Cl}{\mathrm{Cl}} \newcommand{\disc}{\mathrm{disc}}$$

I'm gonna force myself to write more often. I was working on a really
interesting project this past month with a grad student in the physics
department: we're trying to understand anomaly cancellations via index theorems.
I'll write more in the next post (I hope), but roughly speaking, the parity
anomaly for massless fermions (in odd dimensions) which are invariant under
time-reversal can be cancelled by extending to a bulk of one dimension higher,
and adding on "gravitational terms" (i.e., characteristic classes like the A-hat
genus) --- the cancellation stems from the Atiyah-Patodi-Singer index theorem on
manifolds with boundary. It's super cool stuff.

But for now, I'd like to talk about something that's been lying dormant for a
while. Recently, I found [this
answer](https://mathoverflow.net/questions/87345/brauer-groups-and-k-theory/87384#87384)
of Charles Rezk, which basically talks about the idea of this post which I had
tried to work on last semester. That's what motivated me to write up this post.

Let $$R$$ be an $$\Eoo$$-ring, and consider the Brauer space $$\Br(R)$$ of
$$R$$. This is the Picard space of the $$(\infty,2)$$-category $$\Mod_{\Mod_R}$$
of stable $$R$$-linear $$\infty$$-categories. If $$K(R)$$ denotes the algebraic
K-theory of $$R$$, then there is a functor $$\Mod_{\Mod_R} \to \Mod_{K(R)}$$
given by taking algebraic K-theory. The algebraic K-theory of a stable
$$R$$-linear $$\infty$$-category is a $$K(R)$$-module because algebraic K-theory
is lax symmetric monoidal. This also means that the functor $$\Mod_{\Mod_R} \to
\Mod_{K(R)}$$ is lax monoidal, and hence one can take Picard spaces to obtain an
infinite loop map $$\Br(R) \to \Pic(K(R))$$.

If $$R = \cc$$ is the complex numbers, then this defines a map $$\Br(\cc) \to
\Pic(K(\cc))$$. The source is easy to identify: $$\Br(\cc) \simeq B^2 \cc^\times
\simeq K(\cc^\times, 2)$$ as infinite loop spaces, where $$\cc^\times$$ is given
the discrete topology. This stems from the fact that the Brauer and Picard
groups of $$\cc$$ are trivial.

There is a canonical $$\Eoo$$-ring map $$K(\cc) \to \KU$$, which Gabber-Suslin
proved to be an equivalence upon $$p$$-completion for any prime $$p<\infty$$.
One might therefore be interested in studying the Picard space $$\Pic(\KU)$$ ---
this is useful for a number of reasons, including studying $$\Eoo$$-maps into
$$\KU$$.  One may explicitly identify $$\Pic(\KU)$$ as an infinite loop space.
We know that $$\Omega^\infty \KU \simeq \Z\times \BU$$, and $$\BU^\otimes$$
(i.e., $$\BU$$ with its H-space structure given by tensor product) decomposes as
a product $$\CP^\infty \times \BSU^\otimes \simeq \CP^\infty \times
\BSU^\oplus$$. The equivalence $$\BSU^\otimes \simeq \BSU^\oplus$$ is a
consequence of the tom Dieck/Rezk logarithm, and is also a consequence of work
of Adams and Priddy on unique deloopings of infinite loop spaces. In any case,
one finds that $$\GL_1(\KU) \simeq \Z/2\times \CP^\infty \times \BSU$$, and this
gives

$$\Pic(\KU) \simeq \Z/2\times \RP^\infty \times K(\Z,3) \times B^2\SU.$$

Again, this is an equivalence of infinite loop spaces.

In particular, the coconnected cover $$\tau_{\leq 3} \Pic(\KU)$$ splits off
$$\Pic(\KU)$$. It can be explicitly identified with a certain moduli problem.
Namely, if $$R$$ is an $$\Eoo$$-ring, we can consider the
$$(\infty,2)$$-category $$\Mod_{\Mod^\gr_R}$$ of $$\Z/2$$-graded $$R$$-linear
stable $$\infty$$-categories. The Brauer-Wall space $$\BW(R)$$ of $$R$$ is
defined to be $$\Pic(\Mod_{\Mod^\gr_R})$$.  Then there is an equivalence of
infinite loop spaces

$$\BW(\cc) \simeq \tau_{\leq 3} \Pic(\KU) \simeq \Z/2\times \RP^\infty \times
K(\Z,3).$$

Similarly, $$\BW(\RR) \simeq \tau_{\leq 3} \Pic(\KO)$$.

There are a few ways one can prove this fact. Before I do so, I'm obligated to
make a couple of comments. The homotopy groups of $$\BW(\cc)$$ are

$$\pi_0(\BW(\cc)) \cong \Z/2, \ \pi_1(\BW(\cc)) \cong \Z/2, \ \pi_2(\BW(\cc))
\cong 0, \ \pi_3(\BW(\cc)) \cong \Z.$$

This is exactly the homotopy of $$\Omega^\infty \Sigma^2 I_\Z$$, where $$I_\Z$$
is the Anderson dualizing spectrum. In fact, $$\BW(\cc) \simeq \Omega^\infty
\Sigma^3 I_\Z$$. Moreover, unpublished work of Hopkins and Lurie identifies
$$\Omega^\infty \Sigma^2 I_\Z$$ with the fiber of the map $$\gl_1(\KU) \to L_1
\gl_1(\KU)$$, at least after $$p$$-completion. One way to interpret the map
$$\BW(\cc) \to \Pic(\KU)$$ is via this overblown construction.

The above identification of $$\BW(\cc)$$ is originally (albeit not in this form)
due to Atiyah, Bott, and Shapiro. There is a map $$\Br(\cc) \to \BW(\cc)$$, and
the diagram

$$
\begin{array}{ccc}
\Br(\cc) & \to & \Pic(K(\cc)) \\
\downarrow & & \downarrow\\
\BW(\cc) & \to & \Pic(\KU)
\end{array}
$$

commutes. One might wonder if there is a moduli-theoretic description of the
bottom map, since we gave a description of the top map in terms of algebraic
K-theory. Here's one way to do it.

The motivation comes from Atiyah-Bott-Shapiro's original construction. Let's
recall how that goes: let $$\Cl_n$$ denote the complex Clifford algebra
associated to the negative-definite quadratic form over $$\cc^n$$. This is a
$$\Z/2$$-graded algebra. Given any $$\Z/2$$-graded $$\Cl_n$$-module $$M^+\oplus
M^-$$, one can consider the constant vector bundles $$\pi^\ast M^{\pm}$$ on
$$D^n$$, which we will think of as the unit ball in $$\RR^n$$. One obtains a map
$$\sigma:\pi^\ast M^+ \to \pi^\ast M^-$$, given over every point in $$D^n$$ by
multiplication by that vector. Since the map is an isomorphism on the boundary
$$\partial D^n = S^{n-1}$$ (because the norm squared of a point on the boundary
is $$-1$$), one obtains an element of $$\KU^0(D^n, S^{n-1}) \cong
\wt{\KU}^0(S^n)$$.

Now, if the $$\Cl_n$$-module structure on $$M^+\oplus M^-$$ extends to a
$$\Cl_{n+1}$$-module structure, then the isomorphism $$\sigma|_{S^{n-1}}$$
extends to the "upper hemisphere" of $$S^n$$ (which is a $$D^n$$). It follows
that $$\sigma$$ is an isomorphism on $$D^n$$ itself, so the resulting element of
$$\KU^0(S^n)$$ is trivial. In particular, we obtain a map

$$K_0(\Mod_{\Cl_n}^\gr)/K_0(\Mod_{\Cl_{n+1}}^\gr)
=``K_0(\Mod_{\Cl_n}^\gr/\Mod_{\Cl_{n+1}}^\gr)" \to \pi_{-n} \KU,$$

and Atiyah-Bott-Shapiro show that this map is an isomorphism.

So, the question becomes: how do you characterize
$$\Mod_{\Cl_n}^\gr/\Mod_{\Cl_{n+1}}^\gr$$? More precisely, how do you
characterize the image of $$\Mod_{\Cl_{n+1}}^\gr$$ in $$\Mod_{\Cl_n}^\gr$$? This
isn't so bad, based off the above discussion: a $$M^+\oplus M^-\in
\Mod_{\Cl_n}^\gr$$ comes from a graded $$\Cl_{n+1}$$-module if there is an
endomorphism $$\sigma:M^\pm\to M^\mp$$ (given by the action of $$\Cl_n$$) such
that $$\sigma^2$$, which is an element of the $$\cc$$-vector space
$$\Map_\cc(M^\pm, M^\pm)$$, is actually just a negative real (because the
negative norm-squared of any nonzero complex number is a negative real). In
particular, if we say that such a module $$M^+\oplus M^-$$ is "extendible", then
we obtain a map from the Grothendieck group of $$\Mod_{\Cl_n}^\gr$$ modulo
extendible objects to $$\pi_{-n} \KU$$ which is an isomorphism.

The advantage of this definition is that it doesn't use any explicit description
of Clifford algebras: if $$\cC$$ is a $$\Z/2$$-graded $$\cc$$-linear stable
$$\infty$$-category, then we can still say that a $$\Z/2$$-graded object
$$M^+\oplus M^-\in \cC$$ is extendible if there is an endomorphism
$$\sigma:M^\pm\to M^\mp$$ such that $$\sigma^2\in \Map_\cC(M^\pm, M^\pm)$$ is
multiplication by a negative real. Let $$\cC^\ext$$ denote the quotient of
$$\cC$$ by the extendible objects.  Then $$\cC^\ext$$ is another $$\Z/2$$-graded
$$\cc$$-linear stable $$\infty$$-category, and we can take $$L_1
K(\cC^\ext)^\wedge_p$$ for some fixed prime $$p$$. This defines a lax monoidal
functor

$$\Mod_{\Mod_\cc^\gr} \to \Mod_{L_1 K((\Mod_\cc^\gr)^\ext)^\wedge_p}.$$

However, $$K((\Mod_\cc^\gr)^\ext) \cong K(\cc)$$, and by Gabber-Suslin, $$L_1
K((\Mod_\cc^\gr)^\ext)^\wedge_p\cong \KU^\wedge_p$$ (as $$\Eoo$$-rings), so the
procedure defined above gives a lax monoidal functor 

$$\Mod_{\Mod_\cc^\gr} \to \Mod_{\KU^\wedge_p}.$$

Taking Picard spaces, we obtain a map $$\BW(\cc) \to \Pic(\KU^\wedge_p)$$. This
is the map we wanted to construct (upon composition with the map $$\KU\to
\KU^\wedge_p$$).

What's the point of doing it this way? Well, once we do non-formal work to
identify the invertible objects in $$\Mod_{\Mod_\cc^\gr}$$ with
$$\Mod_{\Cl_n}^\gr$$ for varying $$n$$ (in fact, all that matters in the complex
case is $$n=0,1$$, and $$n=0,\cdots,7$$ in the real case), we find that the
Atiyah-Bott-Shapiro identification of $$L_1
K((\Mod_{\Cl_n}^\gr)^\ext)^\wedge_p$$ with $$\Sigma^{-n} \KU^\wedge_p$$ (they do
less than this, but the statement is still true) says that the map $$\pi_0
\BW(\cc) \cong \Z/2 \to \pi_0 \Pic(\KU^\wedge_p)$$ is an isomorphism. This is *a
priori* not obvious at all: it says that the Brauer group grading agrees with
the Picard group grading, and *is* Bott periodicity. All the stuff I said above
goes through with the real numbers instead of $$\cc$$.

One advantage of doing things in this way is that it suggests how one could go
about generalizing it to algebraic K-theory. At this point, we hit an important
roadblock. The reason $$\Z/2$$-gradings on our categories played so well is
because there is an isomorphism $$\RR^\times/(\RR^\times)^2 \cong
\Z/2\{-1,1\}$$; hence the simple definition of extendible objects. I'm not sure
of the right way to define extendible objects in general $$\Z/2$$-graded
$$R$$-linear stable $$\infty$$-categories. Such a notion would allow us to
define a lax monoidal functor

$$\Mod_{\Mod_R^\gr} \to \Mod_{L_1 K(R)^\wedge_p}$$

for every prime $$p$$, and upon taking Picard spaces produce a map

$$\BW(R) \to \Pic(L_1 K(R)^\wedge_p) \cong \Pic(K^\mathrm{et}(R)^\wedge_p).$$

I promised to tell you how to identify $$\BW(\cc)$$. Let's first identify the
homotopy groups of this space. We know that if $$R$$ is any ring, then $$\pi_0
\BW(R)$$ is the Brauer-Wall group of $$R$$ (if $$R = \cc$$ or $$\RR$$, this is
the group of Clifford algebras modulo Morita equivalences, i.e., $$\Z/2$$ or
$$\Z/8$$).  Next, $$\pi_1 \BW(R)$$ is the Picard group of $$\Mod_R^\gr$$. If $$R
= \cc$$, then there are exactly two invertible $$\Z/2$$-graded $$\cc$$-vector
spaces: $$\cc$$ in degrees $$0$$ and $$1$$, respectively. (Recall that the
tensor product of $$V^+\oplus V^-$$ and $$W^+\oplus W^-$$ is $$(V^+\otimes
W^+)\oplus (V^-\otimes W^-)$$ in degree $$0$$ and $$(V^+\otimes W^-)\oplus
(V^-\otimes W^+)$$, respectively.) If we were working in the ordinary
categorical setting (so mapping spaces had discrete topologies), then $$\pi_2
\BW(R)$$ would be $$R^\times$$. However, since $$\BW(R)$$ is defined higher
categorically, this is not true; rather, if $$\BW^\disc(R)$$ denotes the
"discrete" Brauer-Wall space, then there is a fiber sequence of spaces

$$\BW^\disc(\cc) \to \BW(\cc) \to K(\RR,3),$$

where $$\RR$$ has the discrete topology. The long exact sequence on homotopy
gives

$$\cdots \to \pi_3 \BW^\disc(\cc) = 0 \to \pi_3 \BW(\cc) \to \RR\to \pi_2
\BW^\disc(R) = \cc^\times\to \pi_2 \BW(\cc) \to 0,$$

so $$\pi_2 \BW(\cc) = 0$$ and $$\pi_3 \BW(\cc) \cong \Z$$.

Now consider the map $$\BW(\cc)\to \Pic(\KU)$$. The fiber sequence involving
$$\BW(\cc)$$ and $$\BW^\disc(\cc)$$ shows that this map factors through
$$\tau_{\leq 3} \Pic(\KU)$$. We know that $$\tau_{\leq 0} \BW(\cc) \cong
\tau_{\leq 0} \Pic(\KU)$$ (because they're both just $$\Z/2$$). To identify
$$\BW(\cc)$$, we can induct up the Postnikov tower. Note that both $$\tau_{\leq
1} \BW(\cc)$$ and $$\tau_{\leq 1} \Pic(\KU))$$ have both $$\pi_0$$ and $$\pi_1$$
given by $$\Z/2$$, and no other homotopy. Any such space $$Y$$ sits in a fiber
sequence involving $$\RP^\infty$$ and $$\Z/2$$ --- but it is easy to see that
the only spaces $$Y$$ which could possibly sit in such a fiber sequence are the
point and $$\RP^\infty\times \Z/2$$. Since our spaces have nontrivial homotopy,
they must both be the latter.

Neither $$\BW(\cc)$$ nor $$\tau_{\leq 3} \Pic(\KU)$$ have nontrivial $$\pi_2$$,
and both have $$\pi_3$$ given by $$\Z$$. Therefore, if we write $$X$$ to denote
either of these spaces, then there's a fiber sequence

$$K(\Z,3) \to X \to \RP^\infty \times \Z/2.$$

Since everything involved is an infinite loop space, to show that this fiber
sequence splits, it suffices to construct a map $$\RP^\infty\times \Z/2\to X$$.
This is equivalent to a map $$\RP^\infty \to X$$. We know that this map already
exists for $$\Pic(\KU)$$: it's the delooping of the inclusion

$$\Z/2\to \GL_1(\KU) \simeq \Z/2\times \CP^\infty \times \BSU$$

composed with the canonical map $$B\GL_1(\KU) \to \Pic(\KU)$$. Similarly, we
know that $$\pi_0 \Pic(\Mod_\cc^\gr) \cong \Z/2$$, and so we obtain a map
$$\RP^\infty \to B\Pic(\Mod_\cc^\gr)$$. There is a fiber sequence 

$$B\Pic(\cC)\to \Br(\cC)\to \pi_0 \Br(\cC)$$

for any symmetric monoidal $$\infty$$-category $$\cC$$, so we obtain our desired
splitting map $$\RP^\infty \to \BW(\cc)$$.
