---
layout: post
title:  "May nilpotence"
date:   2020-04-24
categories: algebraic-topology
---

<script type="text/javascript" async=""
src="https://www.google-analytics.com/analytics.js"></script>
<script async=""
src="https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtag/js?id=UA-109004213-1"></script>
<script>
  window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || [];
    function gtag(){dataLayer.push(arguments);}
      gtag('js', new Date());

        gtag('config', 'UA-109004213-1');
</script>
<script type="text/javascript"
src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML">
</script>

$$\newcommand{\KO}{\mathrm{KO}} \newcommand{\TMF}{\mathrm{TMF}}
\newcommand{\KU}{\mathrm{KU}} \newcommand{\Mfg}{M_\mathrm{fg}}
\newcommand{\spec}{\mathrm{Spec}} \newcommand{\dX}{\mathcal{X}}
\newcommand{\co}{\mathcal{O}} \newcommand{\Z}{\mathbf{Z}}
\newcommand{\top}{\mathrm{top}} \newcommand{\E}{\mathbf{E}}
\newcommand{\GG}{\mathbf{G}} \newcommand{\DD}{\mathbf{D}}
\newcommand{\Mell}{M_\mathrm{ell}} \newcommand{\ce}{\mathcal{E}}
\newcommand{\H}{\mathrm{H}} \newcommand{\dR}{\mathrm{dR}}
\newcommand{\cf}{\mathcal{F}} \newcommand{\FF}{\mathbf{F}}
\newcommand{\spf}{\mathrm{Spf}\ } \newcommand{\cA}{\mathcal{A}}
\newcommand{\Mcub}{M_\mathrm{cub}} \newcommand{\Mqd}{M_\mathrm{qd}}
\newcommand{\Aut}{\mathrm{Aut}} \newcommand{\tmf}{\mathrm{tmf}}
\newcommand{\Tmf}{\mathrm{Tmf}} \newcommand{\Map}{\mathrm{Map}}
\newcommand{\Ext}{\mathrm{Ext}} \newcommand{\End}{\mathrm{End}}
\newcommand{\cg}{\mathcal{G}} \newcommand{\Hom}{\mathrm{Hom}}
\newcommand{BP}[1]{\mathrm{BP}\langle #1\rangle} \newcommand{\QQ}{\mathbf{Q}}
\newcommand{\PP}{\mathbf{P}} \newcommand{\Gal}{\mathrm{Gal}}
\newcommand{\proj}{\mathrm{Proj}\ } \newcommand{\Ltwo}{L_{K(2)}}
\newcommand{\Eoo}{\mathbf{E}_\infty} \newcommand{\ol}[1]{\overline #1}
\newcommand{\pic}{\mathrm{Pic}} \newcommand{\RP}{\mathbf{R}P}
\newcommand{\BO}{\mathrm{BO}} \newcommand{\cc}{\mathbf{C}}
\newcommand{\CP}{\mathbf{C}P} \newcommand{\wt}[1]{\widetilde #1}
\newcommand{\RR}{\mathbf{R}} \renewcommand{\S}{\mathbb{S}}
\newcommand{\Lone}{L_{K(1)}} \newcommand{\Ltwo}{L_{K(2)}}
\newcommand{\gl}{\mathrm{gl}} \newcommand{\Lk}{L_{K(n)}}
\newcommand{\ku}{\mathrm{ku}} \newcommand{\ko}{\mathrm{ko}}
\newcommand{\GL}{\mathrm{GL}} \newcommand{\Ln}{L_n} \newcommand{\Lt}{L_{K(t)}}
\newcommand{\W}{\mathrm{W}} \newcommand{\BU}{\mathrm{BU}}
\newcommand{\SU}{\mathrm{SU}} \newcommand{\MU}{\mathrm{MU}}
\newcommand{\ul}[1]{\underline #1} \newcommand{\Sq}{\mathrm{Sq}}
\newcommand{\Tr}{\mathrm{Tr}} \newcommand{\d}{\mathrm{d}}
\newcommand{\HP}{\mathbf{H}P} \newcommand{\cL}{\mathcal{L}}
\newcommand{\cs}{\mathrm{cs}} \newcommand{\cd}{\mathcal{D}}
\newcommand{\Bord}{\mathrm{Bord}} \newcommand{\SO}{\mathrm{SO}}
\newcommand{\cC}{\mathcal{C}} \newcommand{\Sp}{\mathrm{Sp}}
\newcommand{\Lkd}{L_{K(d)}} \newcommand{\Mod}{\mathrm{Mod}}
\newcommand{\cH}{\mathcal{H}} \newcommand{\ket}[1]{|#1 \rangle}
\newcommand{\Bun}{\mathrm{Bun}} \newcommand{\cM}{\mathcal{M}}
\newcommand{\MTH}{\mathrm{MT}H} \newcommand{\MSO}{\mathrm{MSO}}
\newcommand{\twsm}{\ \widetilde{\wedge} \ } \newcommand{\BSpin}{\mathrm{BSpin}}
\newcommand{\MSpin}{\mathrm{MSpin}} \newcommand{\BString}{\mathrm{BString}}
\newcommand{\MString}{\mathrm{MString}} \newcommand{\B}{\mathrm{B}}
\newcommand{\der}{\mathrm{der}} \newcommand{\Cat}{\mathrm{Cat}}
\newcommand{\QCoh}{\mathrm{QCoh}} \newcommand{\LMod}{\mathrm{LMod}}
\newcommand{\Rep}{\mathrm{Rep}} \newcommand{\HH}{\mathrm{HH}}
\newcommand{\ZZ}{\mathfrak{Z}} \newcommand{\fr}{\mathrm{fr}}
\newcommand{\BSO}{\mathrm{BSO}} \newcommand{\BSU}{\mathrm{BSU}}
\newcommand{\id}{\mathrm{id}} \newcommand{\Top}{\mathrm{Top}}
\newcommand{\cP}{\mathcal{P}} \newcommand{\U}{\mathrm{U}}
\newcommand{\Sym}{\mathrm{Sym}} \newcommand{\coker}{\mathrm{coker}}
\newcommand{\Vect}{\mathrm{Vect}} \newcommand{\Fun}{\mathrm{Fun}}
\newcommand{\cT}{\mathcal{T}} \newcommand{\cJ}{\mathcal{J}}
\newcommand{\Res}{\mathrm{Res}} \newcommand{\Ind}{\mathrm{Ind}}
\newcommand{\MO}{\mathrm{MO}} \newcommand{\MSO}{\mathrm{MSO}}
\newcommand{\colim}{\mathrm{colim}} \newcommand{\hocolim}{\mathrm{hocolim}}
\newcommand{\fin}{\mathrm{fin}} \newcommand{\Tot}{\mathrm{Tot}}
\newcommand{\im}{\mathrm{im}} \newcommand{\FT}{\mathrm{FT}}
\newcommand{\AA}{\mathbf{A}} \newcommand{\Frob}{\mathrm{Frob}}
\newcommand{\ex}{\mathrm{ex,pr}} \newcommand{\fil}{\mathrm{fil}}
\newcommand{\gr}{\mathrm{gr}} \newcommand{\un}{\mathrm{un}}
\newcommand{\Syn}{\mathrm{Syn}} \newcommand{\Cart}{\mathrm{Cart}}
\newcommand{\bo}{\mathrm{bo}} \newcommand{\mmod}{/\!\!/}
\newcommand{\bsp}{\mathrm{bsp}} \newcommand{\BPP}{\mathrm{BP}}
\newcommand{\CAlg}{\mathrm{CAlg}} \newcommand{\TCart}{\mathrm{TCart}}
\newcommand{\BW}{\mathrm{BW}} \newcommand{\Br}{\mathrm{Br}}
\newcommand{\Pic}{\mathrm{Pic}} \newcommand{\ext}{\mathrm{ext}}
\newcommand{\Cl}{\mathrm{Cl}} \newcommand{\disc}{\mathrm{disc}}
\newcommand{\dir}{D\!\!\!\!/} \newcommand{\bb}{\mathrm{bb}}
\newcommand{\Ran}{\mathrm{Ran}} \newcommand{\cu}{\mathcal{U}}
\newcommand{\Gr}{\mathrm{Gr}} \newcommand{\Alg}{\mathrm{Alg}}
\newcommand{\G}{\Gamma} \newcommand{\dY}{\mathcal{Y}}
\newcommand{\Line}{\mathrm{Line}} \newcommand{\MUP}{\mathrm{MUP}}
\newcommand{\Bl}{\mathrm{Bl}} \newcommand{\St}{\mathrm{St}}
\newcommand{\cB}{\mathcal{B}} \newcommand{\SL}{\mathrm{SL}}
\newcommand{\XX}{\mathrm{X}} \newcommand{\gp}{\mathrm{gp}}
\newcommand{\Q}{\mathrm{Q}} \newcommand{\cI}{\mathcal{I}}
\newcommand{\T}{\mathrm{T}} \newcommand{\D}{\mathrm{D}}
\newcommand{\Aff}{\mathrm{Aff}} \newcommand{\BGL}{\mathrm{BGL}}
\newcommand{\an}{\mathrm{an}} \newcommand{\Tel}{\mathrm{Tel}}
\renewcommand{\|}{|}$$

(As of June, I've made some edits to this post.)

I've been working on understanding the nilpotence theorem better. In [my recent
paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.08951), I sketched out a proof of nilpotence
which relates to the construction of certain higher chromatic Thom spectra. I am
currently writing another paper where I expand on this argument; this paper is
basically an exposition of the proof of the nilpotence theorem, but it will have
some "new" stuff.

In this post, I would like to sketch a proof of a result related to the May
nilpotence conjecture, which goes along the lines of the proof of the nilpotence
theorem. I've been sitting on this post for a while, but figure it's time to
post it. The May nilpotence conjecture was already proven by
[Mathew-Naumann-Noel](https://arxiv.org/abs/1403.2023), but the argument
provided here is different (and also incomplete, but I think it can be
completed). I will detail the analogies to the nilpotence theorem at the end of
the post. In any case, here's the statement of the theorem.

**Theorem** (May nilpotence): Let $$R$$ be an $$\Eoo$$-ring, and $$x\in
\pi_\ast(R)$$ is killed by the integral Hurewicz map. Then $$x$$ is nilpotent.

In other words, $$\H\Z$$ detects nilpotence for $$\Eoo$$-rings. (As is usual, we
shall $$p$$-localize everywhere.)

The observation that I'd like to utilize for this is the Dold-Thom theorem,
which states that $$\H\Z$$ is the infinite symmetric power $$\Sym(\S)$$. This is
the filtered colimit of the partial symmetric powers $$\Sym^{p^n}(\S)$$. If
$$x\in \pi_\ast(R)$$, then the map $$R\to \H\Z_p \wedge R$$ factors through
$$\Sym^{p^n}(\S) \wedge R$$ for some $$n\gg 0$$. By replacing $$R$$ with its
localization $$R[1/x]$$, we can instead try to show that if $$R$$ is an
$$\Eoo$$-ring such that $$\Sym^{p^n}(\S) \wedge R = 0$$, then
$$\Sym^{p^{n-1}}(\S) \wedge R = 0$$.

There is a cofiber sequence $$\Sym^{p^{n-1}}(\S)\to \Sym^{p^n}(\S)\to
\Sym^{p^n}(\S)/\Sym^{p^{n-1}}(\S)$$, it suffices to show that
$$\Sym^{p^n}(\S)/\Sym^{p^{n-1}}(\S) \wedge R = 0$$. The spectrum $$\Sigma^{-n}
\Sym^{p^n}(\S)/\Sym^{p^{n-1}}(\S)$$ is also known as $$L(n)$$ (or rather,
$$L(n)_1$$). It is the Steinberg idempotent applied to the Thom space
$$(B\FF_p^n)^{\ol{\rho}}$$, where $$\ol{\rho}$$ is the reduced regular
representation of dimension $$p^n - 1$$.

[Recall that, in general, $$L(n)_k$$ is the Steinberg idempotent applied to the
Thom spectrum $$(B\FF_p^n)^{k\ol{\rho}}$$. The integer $$n$$ roughly detects the
chromatic height. For instance, if $$\Phi$$ denotes the Bousfield-Kuhn functor,
then $$\Phi_n(S^t)$$ can be solved by a sequence of spectra with fibers $$\Lk
\Sigma^{t-m+1} L(m)^{t-1}_1$$ for $$1\leq m\leq n$$, where $$L(m)^i_j$$ is the
cofiber of $$L(m)_j\to L(m)_{i+1}$$.]

The fact that $$\Sym^{p^n}(\S) \wedge R = 0$$ means that $$L(m) \wedge R = 0$$
for all $$m>n$$. So, we need to show that this implies that $$L(n) \wedge R =
0$$. For this, we might like to argue as in the proof of the nilpotence theorem.
To do so, we state the following conjecture, whose discussion will comprise the
remainder of this post.

**Conjecture:** Let $$X^{(m)}$$ denote the $$m$$-skeleton of $$X$$. The
following statements are true.

1. There is an equality $$\langle L(n)\rangle = \langle
   L(n)^{(\|v_n\|+\cdots+\|v_1\|)}\rangle$$.

2. $$L(n)^{(\|v_n\| + \cdots + \|v_1\|)}$$ is a type $$n$$ spectrum, and there
   is a $$v_n$$-self map of $$L(n)^{(\|v_n\| + \cdots + \|v_1\|)}$$ whose
cofiber is Bousfield equivalent to $$L(n+1)^{(\|v_{n+1}| + \cdots + \|v_1\|)}$$.

One remark: as stated, the conjecture's probably only true for $$p\gg n$$. For
smaller primes, you have to modify the dimension of the skeleta. I haven't yet
worked out the numbers.

Note that, in part (2), if $$L(n)^{(\|v_n\| + \cdots + \|v_1\|)}$$ is a type
$$n$$ spectrum, then the periodicity theorem implies the second half of part
(2). But part of the conjecture is that this can be proven without appealing to
the periodicity theorem. Why does this matter? The entire point of this approach
to the May nilpotence theorem is to avoid appealing to the nilpotence theorem
(or its consequences, like periodicity), and to emphasize that a modification of
the proof works in this $$\Eoo$$-setting too.

This conjecture doesn't actually imply the May nilpotence theorem or our desired
variant (even though I had claimed this in a previous version of the post) ---
but it looks very plausible, and seems to be related to some other deep
observations in this area. Why should the conjecture be true? Let me discuss
part (2) first.  When $$n=0$$, this is saying that there's a self-map of the
sphere whose cofiber is Bousfield equivalent to the $$2(p-1)$$-skeleton of
$$B\Sigma_p$$. But this is true: just take the degree $$p$$ map! When $$n=1$$,
this is saying that there's a self-map of finite stunted projective spaces (or
skeleta of $$B\Sigma_p$$) whose cofiber is Bousfield equivalent to a skeleton of
$$L(2)$$. The $$|v_1|$$-skeleton of $$L(1) = B\Sigma_p$$ is the mod $$p$$ Moore
spectrum, and this has a $$v_1$$-self map whose cofiber is a (generalized) mod
$$(p,v_1)$$-Moore spectrum. But the $$(|v_2| + |v_1|)$$-skeleton of $$L(2)$$ is
the mod $$(p,v_1)$$-Moore spectrum $$V(1)$$, at least for $$p\geq 5$$.

What about part (1)? Well, part (1) is obvious when $$n=0$$... It's a lot more
nontrivial when $$n=1$$; in this case, it states that $$B\Sigma_p$$ has the
same Bousfield class as $$\S/p$$. At least when $$p=2$$, this is an unpublished
result of Mike Hopkins', whose proof I have not yet internalized.

Note that one corollary of the conjecture is the following (whose statement is
sufficient to imply May nilpotence, by the preceding discussion): $$\langle
L(n)\rangle = \langle \mathrm{Tel}(n)\rangle \vee \langle L(n+1)\rangle$$.
Psychologically, at least for me, this looks a lot harder to prove than the two
parts of the conjecture.

So how does this relate to the proof of the nilpotence theorem? More generally,
there is an analogy between the $$\Eoo$$ and $$\E_2$$-worlds, which seems to
play out as in the following table. The last few rows don't have anything to do
with nilpotence.

| "$$\E_{2}$$/$$\mathcal{Q}_1$$-world" | "$$\Eoo$$/$$H_\infty$$-world" |
| ----------- | ----------- |
| nilpotence | May nilpotence |
| $$T(n)$$/chromatic filtration | $$\Sym^{p^n}$$/filtration via the Goodwillie tower of the identity |
| $$\Sigma^{-2} \CP^{p^n} \to T(n)$$ | $$\Sigma^{-2} \Sym^{p^n}(S^2) = \Sigma^{-2} \CP^{p^n}\to \Sym^{p^n}$$ |
| cofiber sequences constructing $$T(n)$$ as $$T(n-1)$$-module | the Takayasu cofiber sequence $$\Sigma^k L(n-1)_{2k+1} \to L(n)_k \to L(n)_{k+1}$$ |
| "Step III" of nilpotence, i.e., Bousfield class of $$T(n-1)$$-module skeleton of $$T(n)$$ is the Bousfield class of $$T(n-1)$$ | conjecture made above|
| Smith's type $$n$$ spectra as a summand of $$\Sigma^\infty (\CP^{p^n})^{\times N}$$ (for $$N\gg 0$$) corresponding to an idempotent of $$\Z_{(p)}[\Sigma_{N/(p-1)}]$$ | Mitchell's type $$n$$ spectra as summands corresponding to the Steinberg idempotent of $$\FF_p[\GL_n(\FF_p)]$$ |
| (in algebraic geometry) the Ran space | (in algebraic geometry) the (lci) Hilbert scheme |
