---
layout: base
title: Writings
---

<script type="text/javascript" src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML"> </script> 

<style>
details {
  border-radius: 4px;
  padding: 0.5em 0.5em 0;
}

summary {
  margin: -0.5em -0.5em 0;
  padding: 0.5em;
}

details[open] {
  padding: 0.5em;
}

details[open] summary {
  margin-bottom: 0.5em;
}
</style>

## Papers

<details> 
<summary> <b>Lower bounds on volumes of hyperbolic link complements in 3-manifolds </b> (2021) with <a href="https://sites.williams.edu/cadams/">Colin Adams</a> et al. 
<a href="https://arxiv.org/pdf/2111.06319.pdf">[arxiv]</a>
</summary>
<p>
Lower bounds on the volumes of hyperbolic link complements are given via a new construction:
  a <i> bracelet link</i> is a link in \(S^3\) decomposed as a cycle of interconnected tangles, and it is proved that a bracelet link of \(2n\) tangles, such that each individual tangle may be <i>replicated</i> into a hyperbolic bracelet link of \(2n\) copies of the tangle, is hyperbolic, with volume at least the average of the replicated links.
</p>
<p>
  This replication is generalized to arbitrary 3-manifolds via a construction called <i>starbursts</i>, which separate the manifold into <i>pieces</i>, which have a well defined \(2n\)-<i>replicant</i>;
  if the resulting pieces from removing a regular neighborhood of a starburst have hyperbolic replicants, then the 3-manifold is hyperbolic, with volume at least the average of the volumes of the replicants. 
</p>
<p>
  Applications are presented to hyperbolicity of links in thickened surfaces and in the solid torus.
</p>
</details>

<details> <summary> 
	<b>Augmented cellular alternating links in thickened surfaces are hyperbolic </b>(2021) with <a href="https://sites.williams.edu/cadams/">Colin Adams</a> et al.
	<a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.05406">[arxiv]</a>
   	<a href="https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s40879-023-00692-3">[EJM]</a>
    </summary>
    Work of <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/1506.03026v1">Colin Adams</a> concerning hyperbolicity of generalized augmented alternating links in the 3-sphere is extended to hyperbolicity of such links in \(I\)-bundles over a surface other than the Klein bottle or \(\mathbf{RP}^2.\)
  This is used to prove hyperbolicity class of links in thickened orientable surfaces called <i> rubber band links </i>, which are generated by graphs.
  Both lower and upper bounds are provided for the volumes of rubber band links, both depending linearly on the number of edges in the graph.
</details>

<br/><br/>  

## In-progress projects to look out for

<details>
<summary>
<!--	<b style="color:#92b99b;">On tensor products of equivariant commutative operads</b> (2024). -->
    <b style="color:#92b99b;">Orbital categories and weak indexing systems.</b> (2024).
    <a style="color:#DeB0ff" href="/files/windex_draft.pdf">[draft]</a>
</summary>
    This is currently a somewhat rough draft. 
    I will finalize it and put a preprint up at the same time as the tensor products of \(\mathcal{N}_\infty\)-operads paper.
</details>

<details> 
<summary>
<!--	<b style="color:#92b99b;">On tensor products of equivariant commutative operads</b> (2024). -->
	<b>On tensor products of equivariant commutative operads</b> (2024).
	<a style="color:#DEB0FF;" href="/files/ninftyintro.pdf">[draft intro]</a>
</summary>
    I'm near finishing this one. 
    A somewhat casual presentation (with many errors) can be found at my notes
    <a href="/files/ninftynotes.pdf">
        "You can construct G-commutative algebras one norm at a time,"
    </a>
    prepared for a casual talk at <a href="https://zygotop.github.io/">Zygotop</a>. 
</details>

<details> 
<summary>
<!--	<b style="color:#92b99b;">On tensor products of equivariant commutative operads</b> (2024). -->
	On the connectivity of spaces of equivariant configurations.
</summary>
    Out of frustration at the state of the literature, I'm most of the way through writing up a lift of Fadell-Neuwirth to a somewhat sharp characterization of connectivity of \(\mathbb{E}_V\)-operads.
</details>



<details>
<summary>
	Canonical indexed tensor products of homotopical Mackey functors.
</summary>
	I've had to develop many of the rudiments of <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/1305.4550"> Gepner-Groth-Nikolaus </a> for non-indexed tensor products in the equivariant setting for the above project; 
	the indexed side is in progress now.
	The stability side of this is of course already done by <a href="https://dspace.mit.edu/bitstream/handle/1721.1/112895/1015183829-MIT.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y">Denis Nardin</a>, so this is mostly about rounding up routine arguments and developing a basic understanding of how indexed tensors in \(\mathrm{Pr}^L_G\) interact with Segal conditions.
	The intended upshot is showing that HHR norms, localized Day convolutions, and box products are all the same and occur in much greater generality;
	this is a first step in showing that homotopical Tambara functors are the same thing as $G$-commutative ring spectra.

</details>

<details> 
<summary>
    Stable additivity of the \(\mathbb{E}_V\) family of \(G\)-operads.
</summary>
    I hope to leverage the closedness of the equivariant BV tensor product to reduce stable additivity of \(\mathbb{E}_V\) operads to checking on algebras in pointed connected \(G\)-spaces, which are well-described using loop space theory.
</details>

<details> 
<summary>
    An \(\infty\)-categorical argument for the tom Dieck splitting of stable \(\mathcal{T}\)-Mackey functors.
</summary>
    I hope to flesh out the content of a talk I gave at <a href="https://zygotop.github.io/pastseminars.html">Zygotop</a> in order to prove a tom Dieck splitting for Mackey functors parameterized by atomic orbital \(\infty\)-categories and valued in arbitrary stable categories.
    Finishing this is low-priority, since I don't have a use, as I haven't found a use for \(\mathcal{T}\)-stabilization of categories of coefficient systems outside of the setting of \(G\)-equivariant suspension spectra, where the result is well-known.
</details>


<br/><br/>  

## Topics I intend to dive into within the next few years

<details> 
<summary>
    A characterization of modules and cotangent complexes over equivariant operad algebras.
</summary>
    I hope to relitigate Higher Algebra chapter 7 in the setting of \(G\)-operads;
    the aim is to lift the characterization of cotangent complexes from <a href="https://arxiv.org/pdf/1007.5315.pdf">Basterra-Mandell</a> in the setting \(G = C_2\) using the (dihedral) Bar construction of e.g. <a href="https://arxiv.org/pdf/2111.06970.pdf">Knoll-Gerhardt-Hill</a>, in preparation for computations in Real deformation theory. 
</details>

<details> 
<summary>
    The multiplication on \(\mathrm{BP}_{\mathbb{R}}\) and \(\mathrm{BP}_{\mathbb{R}} \langle n \rangle\).
</summary>
    <p>
        I hope to construct canonical lifts of \(\mathbb{E}_{2n}-\mathrm{MU}\)-algebra structures on \(\mathrm{BP}\) to \(\mathbb{E}_{n \rho}-\mathrm{MU}_{\mathbb{R}}\)-algebra structures on \(\mathrm{BP}_{\mathbb{R}}\) using the cellularity results announced in <a href="https://arxiv.org/pdf/1806.11033.pdf">Hill-Hopkins</a> as well as the above conjectures concerning change of group functors applied to equivaraint operadic cotangent complexes.
    </p>

    <p>
    After doing so, I hope to add \(\mathbb{R}\) and \(C_2\), as well as replace \(3\) with \(2 \rho - 1\), in section 2 of <a href="https://arxiv.org/pdf/2012.00864.pdf">Hahn-Wilson</a> and claim the new result as my own.
    </p>
</details>

<details> 
<summary>
    Infinite loop space theory for equivariant associative operads.
</summary>
    <p>
    <a href="https://arxiv.org/pdf/1705.03585.pdf">Rubin</a> constructed an associative version of \(N_\infty\) operads; these are the family of \(\mathbb{E}_1\)-containing subfunctors of an equivariant associative operad.
    Tensor products of these are more complicated, as they are not tensor closed (indeed, \(\mathbb{E_2}\) is not a subfunctor of the equivariant associative operad, as it is not discrete)--
    I hope to say something about this using techniques reminescent of <a href="https://arxiv.org/pdf/1808.06006.pdf">Schlank-Yanovski</a> and <a href="https://people.math.rochester.edu/faculty/doug/otherpapers/guillou-may-iterated2.pdf">Guillou-May</a>;
    in particular, I conjecture that the $k$-fold tensor product of \(\mathrm{As}(I)\) can be interpreted as having grouplike algebras which are the \(k\)-fold deloopings for the maps in the transfer system associated to \(I\), in the sense of limits of \(S\)-indexed cubes, and when \(k = \infty\), this computes \(\mathcal{N}_{I \infty}.\)
    </p>
    
    <p>
    The aim of this is to supplant the \(\mathbb{E}_V\) family with a family whose tensor-indecomposables are of a combinatorial nature, bringing the explicit computational ease of the case \(G=C_2\) to arbitrary groups.
    This is low priority, since my computational examples of interest currently only have \(C_2\) actions.
    </p>
</details>

<details> 
<summary>
    Closing the gap between \(G\)-\(\infty\)-operads and genuine \(G\)-operads.
</summary>
    <p>
        What remains in the equivariant version of the program to identify all models of operads with each other is an equivariant lift of <a href="https://arxiv.org/pdf/1606.03826.pdf">Chu-Haugseng-Heuts</a>;
        I hope to use the general machinery of algebraic patterns to add a \(G\) everywhere in the above paper.
    </p>
</details>



<br/><br/>  

## Notes and other things


<details>
<summary> 
<b> A directory of higher G-algebra.</b>
<a href="https://www.overleaf.com/read/pryjbtypsgph#4c3fcc">
[overleaf]</a> <a href="/files/higher_galgebra.pdf">[pdf]</a>
</summary>
a living document intended to serve as a companion to <a href="https://people.math.harvard.edu/~lurie/papers/HA.pdf">Higher algebra</a>, giving citations to equivariant lifts of its greatest hits.
</details>

<details>
<summary> 
<a href="/files/ninftynotes.pdf">
    You can construct G-commutative algebras one norm at a time
</a>
</summary>
    a draft of some <a href="https://zygotop.github.io/">Zygotop</a> lecture notes, complete with many errors, about the additivity of \(N_\infty\)-operads.
</details>

<details>
<summary> 
<a href="/files/borromean.pdf">You can't make the Borromean rings out of chainmail</a>
</summary>
 lecture notes for a talk at Harvard's "trivial notions" seminar.
</details>


<details><summary> 
<a href="/files/cauchy.pdf">Some notes on Cauchy complete categories</a>
</summary>
 prepared for a talk at Harvard's "trivial notions" seminar.
</details>

<details><summary> 
 <a href="/files/juvitop_9_14_21.pdf">An introduction to L-infinity algebras</a>
</summary>
for a talk at <a href="https://math.mit.edu/juvitop/">Juvitop</a>
</details>

<details> <summary> <a href="https://math.mit.edu/research/undergraduate/spur/documents/2019Johnson-Stewart.pdf">Some graphical realizations of two-row Specht modules of Iwahori-Hecke algebras of the symmetric group (2019).</a> Joint with Miles Johnson.
    </summary>
  Studies a generalization of Khovanov's "crossingless matchings" representation of an Iwahori-Hecke Algebra of the symmetric group to include a particular number of endpoints on the "bottom" and "top";
  in the generic case, such a representation is proven to be isomorphic to a two-row Specht module whose young partition corresponds with the number of endpoints.
  Some heuristics are given towards existence of such an isomorphism in all cases.
  In the characteristic-5 case, some irreducible subrepresentation of Jordan-Shor's Fibonacci representation are given, and these are proven to be isomorphic to the irreducible quotients of two-row Specht modules whose rows differ by length at most 3.
</details>
